Project Gutenberg's The Gentleman From Indiana, by Booth Tarkington

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gentleman From Indiana

Author: Booth Tarkington

Release Date: January, 2006 [EBook #9659]
Last Updated: March 3, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GENTLEMAN FROM INDIANA ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer








THE GENTLEMAN FROM INDIANA


By Booth Tarkington


CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I. THE YOUNG MAN WHO CAME TO STAY
    II. THE STRANGE LADY
   III. LONESOMENESS
    IV. THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER
     V. AT THE PASTURE BARS: ELDER-BUSHES MAY HAVE STINGS
    VI. JUNE
   VII. MORNING: “SOME IN RAGS AND SOME IN TAGS AND SOME IN VELVET GOWNS”
   VIII. GLAD AFTERNOON: THE GIRL BY THE BLUE TENT POLE
    IX. NIGHT: IT IS BAD LUCK TO SING BEFORE BREAKFAST
     X. THE COURT-HOUSE BELL
    XI. JOHN BROWN'S BODY
   XII. JERRY THE TELLER
  XIII. JAMES FISBEE
   XIV. A RESCUE
    XV. NETTLES
   XVI. PRETTY MARQUISE
  XVII. HELEN'S TOAST
 XVIII. THE TREACHERY OF H. FISBEE
   XIX. THE GREAT HARKLESS COMES HOME




CHAPTER I. THE YOUNG MAN WHO CAME TO STAY

There is a fertile stretch of flat lands in Indiana where unagrarian
Eastern travellers, glancing from car-windows, shudder and return their
eyes to interior upholstery, preferring even the swaying caparisons of a
Pullman to the monotony without. The landscape lies interminably level:
bleak in winter, a desolate plain of mud and snow; hot and dusty in
summer, in its flat lonesomeness, miles on miles with not one cool hill
slope away from the sun. The persistent tourist who seeks for signs of
man in this sad expanse perceives a reckless amount of rail fence; at
intervals a large barn; and, here and there, man himself, incurious,
patient, slow, looking up from the fields apathetically as the Limited
flies by. Widely separated from each other are small frame railway
stations--sometimes with no other building in sight, which indicates
that somewhere behind the adjacent woods a few shanties and thin
cottages are grouped about a couple of brick stores.

On the station platforms there are always two or three wooden
packing-boxes, apparently marked for travel, but they are sacred from
disturbance and remain on the platform forever; possibly the right train
never comes along. They serve to enthrone a few station loafers, who
look out from under their hat-brims at the faces in the car-windows with
the languid scorn a permanent fixture always has for a transient, and
the pity an American feels for a fellow-being who does not live in his
town. Now and then the train passes a town built scatteringly about
a court-house, with a mill or two humming near the tracks. This is
a county-seat, and the inhabitants and the local papers refer to it
confidently as “our city.” The heart of the flat lands is a central area
called Carlow County, and the county-seat of Carlow is a town unhappily
named in honor of its first settler, William Platt, who christened it
with his blood. Natives of this place have sometimes remarked, easily,
that their city had a population of from five to six thousand souls. It
is easy to forgive them for such statements; civic pride is a virtue.

The social and business energy of Plattville concentrates on the Square.
Here, in summer-time, the gentlemen are wont to lounge from store
to store in their shirt sleeves; and here stood the old, red-brick
court-house, loosely fenced in a shady grove of maple and elm--“slipp'ry
ellum”--called the “Court-House Yard.” When the sun grew too hot for the
dry-goods box whittlers in front of the stores around the Square and the
occupants of the chairs in front of the Palace Hotel on the corner, they
would go across and drape themselves over the court-house fence, under
the trees, and leisurely carve there initials on the top board. The
farmers hitched their teams to the fence, for there were usually loafers
energetic enough to shout “Whoa!” if the flies worried the horses
beyond patience. In the yard, amongst the weeds and tall, unkept grass,
chickens foraged all day long; the fence was so low that the most
matronly hen flew over with propriety; and there were gaps that
accommodated the passage of itinerant pigs. Most of the latter, however,
preferred the cool wallows of the less important street corners. Here
and there a big dog lay asleep in the middle of the road, knowing well
that the easy-going Samaritan, in his case, would pass by on the other
side.

Only one street attained to the dignity of a name--Main Street, which
formed the north side of the Square. In Carlow County, descriptive
location is usually accomplished by designating the adjacent, as, “Up at
Bardlocks',” “Down by Schofields',” “Right where Hibbards live,” “Acrost
from Sol. Tibbs's,” or, “Other side of Jones's field.” In winter, Main
Street was a series of frozen gorges land hummocks; in fall and spring,
a river of mud; in summer, a continuing dust heap; it was the best
street in Plattville.

The people lived happily; and, while the world whirled on outside, they
were content with their own. It would have moved their surprise as
much as their indignation to hear themselves spoken of as a “secluded
community”; for they sat up all night to hear the vote of New York,
every campaign. Once when the President visited Rouen, seventy miles
away, there were only few bankrupts (and not a baby amongst them) left
in the deserted homes of Carlow County. Everybody had adventures; almost
everybody saw the great man; and everybody was glad to get back home
again. It was the longest journey some of them ever set upon, and these,
elated as they were over their travels, determined to think twice ere
they went that far from home another time.

On Saturdays, the farmers enlivened the commercial atmosphere of
Plattville; and Miss Tibbs, the postmaster's sister and clerk, used to
make a point of walking up and down Main Street as often as possible,
to get a thrill in the realization of some poetical expressions that
haunted her pleasingly; phrases she had employed frequently in her poems
for the “Carlow County Herald.” When thirty or forty country people were
scattered along the sidewalks in front of the stores on Main Street, she
would walk at nicely calculated angles to the different groups so as to
leave as few gaps as possible between the figures, making them appear
as near a solid phalanx as she could. Then she would murmur to herself,
with the accent of soulful revel, “The thronged city streets,” and,
“Within the thronged city,” or, “Where the thronging crowds were
swarming and the great cathedral rose.” Although she had never been
beyond Carlow and the bordering counties in her life, all her poems were
of city streets and bustling multitudes. She was one of those who had
been unable to join the excursion to Rouen when the President was there;
but she had listened avidly to her friends' descriptions of the crowds.
Before that time her muse had been sylvan, speaking of “Flow'rs of May,”
 and hinting at thoughts that overcame her when she roved the woodlands
thro'; but now the inspiration was become decidedly municipal and
urban, evidently reluctant to depart beyond the retail portions of a
metropolis. Her verses beginning, “O, my native city, bride of Hibbard's
winding stream,”--Hibbard's Creek runs west of Plattville, except in
time of drought--“When thy myriad lights are shining, and thy faces,
like a dream, Go flitting down thy sidewalks when their daily toil is
done,” were pronounced, at the time of their publication, the best poem
that had ever appeared in the “Herald.”

This unlucky newspaper was a thorn in the side of every patriot of
Carlow County. It was a poor paper; everybody knew it was a poor paper;
it was so poor that everybody admitted it was a poor paper--worse, the
neighboring county of Amo possessed a better paper, the “Amo Gazette.”
 The “Carlow County Herald” was so everlastingly bad that Plattville
people bent their heads bitterly and admitted even to citizens of Amo
that the “Gazette” was the better paper. The “Herald” was a weekly,
issued on Saturday; sometimes it hung fire over Sunday and appeared
Monday evening. In their pride, the Carlow people supported the “Herald”
 loyally and long; but finally subscriptions began to fall off and the
“Gazette” gained them. It came to pass that the “Herald” missed fire
altogether for several weeks; then it came out feebly, two small
advertisements occupying the whole of the fourth page. It was breathing
its last. The editor was a clay-colored gentleman with a goatee, whose
one surreptitious eye betokened both indolence of disposition and
a certain furtive shrewdness. He collected all the outstanding
subscriptions he could, on the morning of the issue just mentioned, and,
thoughtfully neglecting several items on the other side of the ledger,
departed from Plattville forever.

The same afternoon a young man from the East alighted on the platform
of the railway station, north of the town, and, entering the rickety
omnibus that lingered there, seeking whom it might rattle to deafness,
demanded to be driven to the Herald Building. It did not strike the
driver that the newcomer was precisely a gay young man when he climbed
into the omnibus; but, an hour later, as he stood in the doorway of the
edifice he had indicated as his destination, depression seemed to have
settled into the marrow of his bones. Plattville was instantly alert to
the stranger's presence, and interesting conjectures were hazarded all
day long at the back door of Martin's Dry-Goods Emporium, where all the
clerks from the stores around the Square came to play checkers or look
on at the game. (This was the club during the day; in the evening the
club and the game removed to the drug, book, and wall-paper store on
the corner.) At supper, the new arrival and his probable purposes were
discussed over every table in the town. Upon inquiry, he had informed
Judd Bennett, the driver of the omnibus, that he had come to stay.
Naturally, such a declaration caused a sensation, as people did not come
to Plattville to live, except through the inadvertency of being born
there. In addition, the young man's appearance and attire were reported
to be extraordinary. Many of the curious, among them most of the
marriageable females of the place, took occasion to pass and repass the
sign of the “Carlow County Herald” during the evening.

Meanwhile, the stranger was seated in the dingy office upstairs with
his head bowed low on his arms. Twilight stole through the dirty
window-panes and faded into darkness. Night filled the room. He did not
move. The young man from the East had bought the “Herald” from an
agent; had bought it without ever having been within a hundred miles of
Plattville. He had vastly overpaid for it. Moreover, the price he had
paid for it was all the money he had in the world.

The next morning he went bitterly to work. He hired a compositor from
Rouen, a young man named Parker, who set type all night long and helped
him pursue advertisements all day. The citizens shook their heads
pessimistically. They had about given up the idea that the “Herald”
 could ever amount to anything, and they betrayed an innocent, but
caustic, doubt of ability in any stranger.

One day the new editor left a note on his door; “Will return in fifteen
minutes.”

Mr. Rodney McCune, a politician from the neighboring county of Gaines,
happening to be in Plattville on an errand to his henchmen, found the
note, and wrote beneath the message the scathing inquiry, “Why?”

When he discovered this addendum, the editor smiled for the first time
since his advent, and reported the incident in his next issue, using the
rubric, “Why Has the 'Herald' Returned to Life?” as a text for a rousing
editorial on “honesty in politics,” a subject of which he already knew
something. The political district to which Carlow belonged was governed
by a limited number of gentlemen whose wealth was ever on the increase;
and “honesty in politics” was a startling conception to the minds of the
passive and resigned voters, who discussed the editorial on the street
corners and in the stores. The next week there was another editorial,
personal and local in its application, and thereby it became evident
that the new proprietor of the “Herald” was a theorist who believed, in
general, that a politician's honor should not be merely of that
middling healthy species known as “honor amongst politicians”; and, in
particular, that Rodney McCune should not receive the nomination of his
party for Congress. Now, Mr. McCune was the undoubted dictator of the
district, and his followers laughed at the stranger's fantastic onset.

But the editor was not content with the word of print; he hired a horse
and rode about the country, and (to his own surprise) he proved to be
an adaptable young man who enjoyed exercise with a pitchfork to the
farmer's profit while the farmer talked. He talked little himself, but
after listening an hour or so, he would drop a word from the saddle as
he left; and then, by some surprising wizardry, the farmer, thinking
over the interview, decided there was some sense in what that young
fellow said, and grew curious to see what the young fellow had further
to say in the “Herald.”

Politics is the one subject that goes to the vitals of every rural
American; and a Hoosier will talk politics after he is dead.

Everybody read the campaign editorials, and found them interesting,
although there was no one who did not perceive the utter absurdity of a
young stranger's dropping into Carlow and involving himself in a party
fight against the boss of the district. It was entirely a party fight;
for, by grace of the last gerrymander, the nomination carried with it
the certainty of election. A week before the convention there came a
provincial earthquake; the news passed from man to man in awe-struck
whispers--McCune had withdrawn his name, making the hollowest of excuses
to his cohorts. Nothing was known of the real reason for his disordered
retreat, beyond the fact that he had been in Plattville on the morning
before his withdrawal and had issued from a visit to the “Herald” office
in a state of palsy. Mr. Parker, the Rouen printer, had been present at
the close of the interview; but he held his peace at the command of his
employer. He had been called into the sanctum, and had found McCune,
white and shaking, leaning on the desk.

“Parker,” said the editor, exhibiting a bundle of papers he held in his
hand, “I want you to witness a verbal contract between Mr. McCune and
myself. These papers are an affidavit and copies of some records of a
street-car company which obtained a charter while Mr McCune was in
the State legislature. They were sent to me by a man I do not know, an
anonymous friend of Mr. McCune's; in fact, a friend he seems to have
lost. On consideration of our not printing these papers, Mr. McCune
agrees to retire from politics for good. You understand, if he ever
lifts his head again, politically, We publish them, and the courts will
do the rest. Now, in case anything should happen to me----”

“Something will happen to you, all right,” broke out McCune. “You can
bank on that, you black----”

“Come,” the editor interrupted, not unpleasantly “why should there be
anything personal, in all this? I don't recognize you as my private
enemy--not at all; and I think you are getting off rather easily; aren't
you? You stay out of politics, and everything will be comfortable. You
ought never to have been in it, you see. It's a mistake not to keep
square, because in the long run somebody is sure to give you away--like
the fellow who sent me these. You promise to hold to a strictly private
life?”

“You're a traitor to the party,” groaned the other, “but you only
wait----”

The editor smiled sadly. “Wait nothing. Don't threaten, man. Go home to
your wife. I'll give you three to one she'll be glad you are out of it.”

“I'll give you three to one,” said McCune, “that the White Caps will
get you if you stay in Carlow. You want to look out for yourself, I tell
you, my smart boy!”

“Good-day, Mr. McCune,” was the answer. “Let me have your note of
withdrawal before you leave town this afternoon.” The young man paused
a moment, then extended his hand, as he said: “Shake hands, won't you?
I--I haven't meant to be too hard on you. I hope things will seem easier
and gayer to you before long; and if--if anything should turn up that I
can do for you in a private way, I'll be very glad, you know. Good-by.”

The sound of the “Herald's” victory went over the State. The paper came
out regularly. The townsfolk bought it and the farmers drove in for it.
Old subscribers came back. Old advertisers renewed. The “Herald” began
to sell in Amo, and Gaines County people subscribed. Carlow folk held
up their heads when journalism was mentioned. Presently the “Herald”
 announced a news connection with Rouen, and with that, and the aid of
“patent insides,” began an era of three issues a week, appearing on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. The Plattville Brass Band serenaded
the editor.

During the second month of the new regime of the “Herald,” the working
force of the paper received an addition. One night the editor found some
barroom loafers tormenting a patriarchal old man who had a magnificent
head and a grand white beard. He had been thrown out of a saloon, and he
was drunk with the drunkenness of three weeks steady pouring. He propped
himself against a wall and reproved his tormentors in Latin. “I'm
walking your way, Mr. Fisbee,” remarked the journalist, hooking his arm
into the old man's. “Suppose we leave our friends here and go home?”

Mr. Fisbee was the one inhabitant of the town who had an unknown past;
no one knew more about him than that he had been connected with a
university somewhere, and had travelled in unheard-of countries before
he came to Plattville. A glamour of romance was thrown about him by the
gossips, to whom he ever proved a fund of delightful speculation. There
was a dark, portentous secret in his life, it was agreed; an opinion
not too well confirmed by the old man's appearance. His fine eyes had a
pathetic habit of wandering to the horizon in a questioning fashion that
had a queer sort of hopelessness in it, as if his quest were one for the
Holy Grail, perhaps; and his expression was mild, vague, and sad. He had
a look of race and blood; and yet, at the first glance, one saw that he
was lost in dreams, and one guessed that the dreams would never be
of great practicability in their application. Some such impression of
Fisbee was probably what caused the editor of the “Herald” to nickname
him (in his own mind) “The White Knight,” and to conceive a strong, if
whimsical, fancy for him.

Old Fisbee had come (from nobody knew where) to Plattville to teach,
and had been principal of the High School for ten years, instructing
his pupils after a peculiar fashion of his own, neglecting the ordinary
courses of High School instruction to lecture on archaeology to the
dumfounded scholars; growing year by year more forgetful and absent,
lost in his few books and his own reflections, until, though undeniably
a scholar, he had been discharged for incompetency. He was old; he had
no money and no way to make money; he could find nothing to do. The blow
had seemed to daze him for a time; then he began to drop in at the hotel
bar, where Wilkerson, the professional drunkard, favored him with his
society. The old man understood; he knew it was the beginning of the
end. He sold his books in order to continue his credit at the Palace
bar, and once or twice, unable to proceed to his own dwelling, spent
the night in a lumber yard, piloted thither by the hardier veteran,
Wilkerson.

The morning after the editor took him home, Fisbee appeared at the
“Herald” office in a new hat and a decent suit of black. He had received
his salary in advance, his books had been repurchased, and he had become
the reportorial staff of the “Carlow County Herald”; also, he was to
write various treatises for the paper. For the first few evenings, when
he started home from the office, his chief walked with him, chatting
heartily, until they had passed the Palace bar. But Fisbee's redemption
was complete.

The old man had a daughter. When she came to Plattville, he told her
what the editor of the “Herald” had done for him.

The journalist kept steadily at his work; and, as time went on, the
bitterness his predecessor's swindle had left him passed away. But his
loneliness and a sense of defeat grew and deepened. When the vistas of
the world had opened to his first youth, he had not thought to spend his
life in such a place as Plattville; but he found himself doing it, and
it was no great happiness to him that the congressional representative
of the district, the gentleman whom the “Herald's” opposition to
McCune had sent to Washington, came to depend on his influence for
renomination; nor did the realization that the editor of the “Carlow
County Herald” had come to be McCune's successor as political dictator
produce a perceptibly enlivening effect on the young man. The years
drifted very slowly, and to him it seemed they went by while he stood
far aside and could not even see them move. He did not consider the life
he led an exciting one; but the other citizens of Carlow did when he
undertook a war against the “White Caps.” The natives were much more
afraid of the “White Caps” than he was; they knew more about them and
understood them better than he did.




CHAPTER II. THE STRANGE LADY

IT was June. From the patent inner columns of the “Carlow County Herald”
 might be gleaned the information (enlivened by cuts of duchesses) that
the London season had reached a high point of gaiety; and that, although
the weather had grown inauspiciously warm, there was sufficient gossip
for the thoughtful. To the rapt mind of Miss Selina Tibbs came a
delicious moment of comparison: precisely the same conditions prevailed
in Plattville.

Not unduly might Miss Selina lay this flattering unction to her soul,
and well might the “Herald” declare that “Carlow events were crowding
thick and fast.” The congressional representative of the district was
to deliver a lecture at the court-house; a circus was approaching the
county-seat, and its glories would be exhibited “rain or shine”; the
court had cleared up the docket by sitting to unseemly hours of the
night, even until ten o'clock--one farmer witness had fallen asleep
while deposing that he “had knowed this man Hender some eighteen
year”--and, as excitements come indeed when they do come, and it seldom
rains but it pours, the identical afternoon of the lecture a strange
lady descended from the Rouen Accommodation and was greeted on the
platform by the wealthiest citizen of the county. Judge Briscoe, and
his daughter, Minnie, and (what stirred wonder to an itch almost beyond
endurance) Mr. Fisbee! and they then drove through town on the way to
the Briscoe mansion, all four, apparently, in a fluster of pleasure and
exhilaration, the strange lady engaged in earnest conversation with Mr.
Fisbee on the back seat.

Judd Bennett had had the best stare at her, but, as he immediately fell
into a dreamy and absent state, little satisfaction could be got from
him, merely an exasperating statement that the stranger seemed to have
a kind of new look to her. However, by means of Miss Mildy Upton, a
domestic of the Briscoe household, the community was given something a
little more definite. The lady's name was Sherwood; she lived in Rouen;
and she had known Miss Briscoe at the eastern school the latter had
attended (to the feverish agitation of Plattville) three years before;
but Mildy confessed her inadequacy in the matter of Mr. Fisbee. He had
driven up in the buckboard with the others and evidently expected to
stay for supper Mr. Tibbs, the postmaster (it was to the postoffice
that Miss Upton brought her information) suggested, as a possible
explanation, that the lady was so learned that the Briscoes had invited
Fisbee on the ground of his being the only person in Plattville they
esteemed wise enough to converse with her; but Miss Tibbs wrecked her
brother's theory by mentioning the name of Fisbee's chief.

“You see, Solomon,” she sagaciously observed, “if that were true, they
would have invited him, instead of Mr. Fisbee, and I wish they had.
He isn't troubled with malaria, and yet the longer he lives here the
sallower-looking and sadder-looking he gets. I think the company of a
lovely stranger might be of great cheer to his heart, and it will be
interesting to witness the meeting between them. It may be,” added the
poetess, “that they _have_ already met, on his travels before he settled
here. It may be that they are old friends--or even more.”

“Then what,” returned her brother, “what is he doin' settin' up in his
office all afternoon with ink on his forehead, while Fisbee goes out
ridin' with her and stays for supper after_werds_?”

Although the problem of Fisbee's attendance remained a mere maze of
hopeless speculation, Mildy had been present at the opening of Miss
Sherwood's trunk, and here was matter for the keen consideration of the
ladies, at least. Thoughtful conversations in regard to hats and linings
took place across fences and on corners of the Square that afternoon;
and many gentlemen wondered (in wise silence) why their spouses were
absent-minded and brooded during the evening meal.

At half-past seven, the Hon. Kedge Halloway of Amo delivered himself
of his lecture; “The Past and Present. What we may Glean from Them, and
Their Influence on the Future.” At seven the court-room was crowded, and
Miss Tibbs, seated on the platform (reserved for prominent citizens),
viewed the expectant throng with rapture. It is possible that she would
have confessed to witnessing a sea of faces, but it is more probable
that she viewed the expectant throng. The thermometer stood at
eighty-seven degrees and there was a rustle of incessantly moving
palm-leaf fans as, row by row, their yellow sides twinkled in the light
of eight oil lamps. The stouter ladies wielded their fans with vigor.
There were some very pretty faces in Mr. Halloway's audience, but it
is a peculiarity of Plattville that most of those females who do not
incline to stoutness incline far in the opposite direction, and the lean
ladies naturally suffered less from the temperature than their sisters.
The shorn lamb is cared for, but often there seems the intention to
impart a moral in the refusal of Providence to temper warm weather to
the full-bodied.

Old Tom Martin expressed a strong consciousness of such intention when
he observed to the shocked Miss Selina, as Mr. Bill Snoddy, the stoutest
citizen of the county, waddled abnormally up the aisle: “The Almighty
must be gittin” a heap of fun out of Bill Snoddy to-night.”

“Oh, Mr. Martin!” exclaimed Miss Tibbs, fluttering at his irreverence.

“Why, you would yourself. Miss Seliny,” returned old Tom. Mr. Martin
always spoke in one key, never altering the pitch of his high, dry,
unctuous drawl, though, when his purpose was more than ordinarily
humorous, his voice assumed a shade of melancholy. Now and then he
meditatively passed his fingers through his gray beard, which followed
the line of his jaw, leaving his upper lip and most of his chin
smooth-shaven. “Did you ever reason out why folks laugh so much at fat
people?” he continued. “No, ma'am. Neither'd anybody else.”

“Why is it, Mr. Martin?” asked Miss Selina.

“It's like the Creator's sayin', 'Let there be light.' He says,
'Let ladies be lovely--'” (Miss Tibbs bowed)--“and 'Let men-folks be
honest--sometimes;' and, 'Let fat people be held up to ridicule
till they fall off.' You can't tell why it is; it was jest ordained
that-a-way.”

The room was so crowded that the juvenile portion of the assemblage was
ensconced in the windows. Strange to say, the youth of Plattville were
not present under protest, as their fellows of a metropolis would have
been, lectures being well understood by the young of great cities
to have instructive tendencies. The boys came to-night because they
insisted upon coming. It was an event. Some of them had made sacrifices
to come, enduring even the agony (next to hair-cutting in suffering) of
having their ears washed. Conscious of parental eyes, they fronted
the public with boyhood's professional expressionlessness, though they
communicated with each other aside in a cipher-language of their own,
and each group was a hot-bed of furtive gossip and sarcastic comment.
Seated in the windows, they kept out what small breath of air might
otherwise have stolen in to comfort the audience.

Their elders sat patiently dripping with perspiration, most of the
gentlemen undergoing the unusual garniture of stiffly-starched collars,
those who had not cultivated chin beards to obviate such arduous
necessities of pomp and state, hardly bearing up under the added anxiety
of cravats. However, they sat outwardly meek under the yoke; nearly all
of them seeking a quiet solace of tobacco--not that they smoked; Heaven
and the gallantry of Carlow County forbid--nor were there anywhere
visible tokens of the comforting ministrations of nicotine to violate
the eye of etiquette. It is an art of Plattville.

Suddenly there was a hum and a stir and a buzz of whispering in the
room. Two gray old men and two pretty young women passed up the aisle to
the platform. One old man was stalwart and ruddy, with a cordial eye
and a handsome, smooth-shaven, big face. The other was bent and trembled
slightly; his face was very white; he had a fine high brow, deeply
lined, the brow of a scholar, and a grandly flowing white beard that
covered his chest, the beard of a patriarch. One of the young women
was tall and had the rosy cheeks and pleasant eyes of her father, who
preceded her. The other was the strange lady.

A universal perturbation followed her progress up the aisle, if she had
known it. She was small and fair, very daintily and beautifully made;
a pretty Marquise whose head Greuze should have painted. Mrs. Columbus
Landis, wife of the proprietor of the Palace Hotel, conferring with a
lady in the next seat, applied an over-burdened adjective: “It ain't so
much she's han'some, though she is, that--but don't you notice she's got
a kind of smart look to her? Her bein' so teeny, kind of makes it more
so, somehow, too.” What stunned the gossips of the windows to awed
admiration, however, was the unconcerned and stoical fashion in which
she wore a long bodkin straight through her head. It seemed a large
sacrifice merely to make sure one's hat remained in place.

The party took seats a little to the left and rear of the lecturer's
table, and faced the audience. The strange lady chatted gaily with the
other three, apparently as unconscious of the multitude of eyes fixed
upon her as the gazers were innocent of rude intent. There were pretty
young women in Plattville; Minnie Briscoe was the prettiest, and, as the
local glass of fashion reflected, “the stylishest”; but this girl
was different, somehow, in a way the critics were puzzled to
discover--different, from the sparkle of her eyes and the crown of her
trim sailor hat, to the edge of her snowy duck skirt.

Judd Bennett sighed a sigh that was heard in every corner of the room.
As everybody immediately turned to look at him, he got up and went out.

It had long been a jocose fiction of Mr. Martin, who was a widower of
thirty years' standing, that he and the gifted authoress by his side
were in a state of courtship. Now he bent his rugged head toward her
to whisper: “I never thought to see the day you'd have a rival in my
affections. Miss Seliny, but yonder looks like it. I reckon I'll have
to go up to Ben Tinkle's and buy that fancy vest he's had in stock this
last twelve year or more. Will you take me back when she's left the city
again; Miss Seliny?” he drawled. “I expect, maybe, Miss Sherwood is
one of these here summer girls. I've heard of 'em but I never see one
before. You better take warning and watch me--Fisbee won't have no clear
field from now on.”

The stranger leaned across to speak to Miss Briscoe and her sleeve
touched the left shoulder of the old man with the patriarchal white
beard. A moment later he put his right hand to that shoulder and gently
moved it up and down with a caressing motion over the shabby black
broadcloth her garment had touched.

“Look at that old Fisbee!” exclaimed Mr. Martin, affecting indignation.
“Never be 'n half as spruced up and wide awake in all his life. He's
prob'ly got her to listen to him on the decorations of Nineveh--it's my
belief he was there when it was destroyed. Well, if I can't cut him out
we'll get our respected young friend of the 'Herald' to do it.”

“Sh!” returned Miss Tibbs. “Here he is.”

The seats upon the platform were all occupied, except the two foremost
ones in the centre (one on each side of a little table with a lamp, a
pitcher of ice-water, and a glass) reserved for the lecturer and the
gentleman who was to introduce him. Steps were audible in the hall, and
every one turned to watch the door, where the distinguished pair now
made their appearance in a hush of expectation over which the beating
of the fans alone prevailed. The Hon. Kedge Halloway was one of the
gleaners of the flesh-pots, himself, and he marched into the room
unostentatiously mopping his shining expanse of brow with a figured
handkerchief. He was a person of solemn appearance; a fat gold
watch-chain which curved across his ponderous front, adding mysteriously
to his gravity. At his side strolled a very tall, thin, rather
stooping--though broad-shouldered--rather shabby young man with a
sallow, melancholy face and deep-set eyes that looked tired. When they
were seated, the orator looked over his audience slowly and with an
incomparable calm; then, as is always done, he and the melancholy young
man exchanged whispers for a few moments. After this there was a pause,
at the end of which the latter rose and announced that it was his
pleasure and his privilege to introduce, that evening, a gentleman who
needed no introduction to that assemblage. What citizen of Carlow needed
an introduction, asked the speaker, to the orator they had applauded
in the campaigns of the last twenty years, the statesman author of
the Halloway Bill, the most honored citizen of the neighboring and
flourishing county and city of Amo? And, the speaker would say, that if
there were one thing the citizens of Carlow could be held to envy the
citizens of Amo, it was the Honorable Kedge Halloway, the thinker,
to whose widely-known paper they were about to have the pleasure and
improvement of listening.

The introduction was so vehemently applauded that, had there been
present a person connected with the theatrical profession, he might have
been nervous for fear the introducer had prepared no encore. “Kedge is
too smart to take it all to himself,” commented Mr. Martin. “He knows
it's half account of the man that said it.”

He was not mistaken. Mr. Halloway had learned a certain perceptiveness
on the stump. Resting one hand upon his unfolded notes upon the table,
he turned toward the melancholy young man (who had subsided into the
small of his back in his chair) and, after clearing his throat, observed
with sudden vehemence that he must thank his gifted friend for his
flattering remarks, but that when he said that Carlow envied Amo a
Halloway, it must be replied that Amo grudged no glory to her sister
county of Carlow, but, if Amo could find envy in her heart it would be
because Carlow possessed a paper so sterling, so upright, so brilliant,
so enterprising as the “Carlow County Herald,” and a journalist so
talented, so gifted, so energetic, so fearless, as its editor.

The gentleman referred to showed very faint appreciation of these
ringing compliments. There was a lamp on the table beside him, against
which, to the view of Miss Sherwood of Rouen, his face was silhouetted,
and very rarely had it been her lot to see a man look less enthusiastic
under public and favorable comment of himself. She wondered if he,
also, remembered the Muggleton cricket match and the subsequent dinner
oratory.

The lecture proceeded. The orator winged away to soary heights with
gestures so vigorous as to cause admiration for his pluck in making use
of them on such a night; the perspiration streamed down his face, his
neck grew purple, and he dared the very face of apoplexy, binding his
auditors with a double spell. It is true that long before the peroration
the windows were empty and the boys were eating stolen, unripe fruit in
the orchards of the listeners. The thieves were sure of an alibi.

The Hon. Mr. Halloway reached a logical conclusion which convinced even
the combative and unwilling that the present depends largely upon the
past, while the future will be determined, for the most part, by the
conditions of the present. “The future,” he cried, leaning forward with
an expression of solemn warning, “The future is in our own hands, ladies
and gentlemen of the city of Plattville. Is it not so? We will find it
so. Turn it over in your minds.” He leaned backward and folded his hands
benevolently on his stomach and said in a searching whisper; “Ponder
it.” He waited for them to ponder it, and little Mr. Swanter, the
druggist and bookseller, who prided himself on his politeness and who
was seated directly in front, scratched his head and knit his brows
to show that he was pondering it. The stillness was intense; the fans
ceased to beat; Mr. Snoddy could be heard breathing dangerously. Mr.
Swanter was considering the advisability of drawing a pencil from his
pocket and figuring on it upon his cuff, when suddenly, with the energy
of a whirlwind, the lecturer threw out his arms to their fullest extent
and roared: “It is a _fact_! It is carven on stone in the gloomy caverns
of TIME. It is writ in FIRE on the imperishable walls of Fate!”

After the outburst, his voice sank with startling rapidity to a tone of
honeyed confidence, and he wagged an inviting forefinger at Mr.
Snoddy, who opened his mouth. “Shall we take an example? Not from the
marvellous, my friends; let us seek an illustration from the ordinary.
Is that not better? One familiar to the humblest of us. One we can all
comprehend. One from our every-day life. One which will interest even
the young. Yes. The common house-fly. On a window-sill we place a bit
of fly-paper, and contiguous to it, a flower upon which the happy
insect likes to feed and rest. The little fly approaches. See, he hovers
between the two. One is a fatal trap, an ambuscade, and the other a
safe harbor and an innocuous haven. But mystery allures him. He poises,
undecided. That is the present. That, my friends, is the Present! What
will he do? WHAT will he do? What will he DO? Memories of the past
are whispering to him: 'Choose the flower. Light on the posy.' Here we
clearly see the influence of the past upon the present. But, to employ a
figure of speech, the fly-paper beckons to the insect toothsomely, and,
thinks he; 'Shall I give it a try? Shall I? Shall I give it a try?' The
future is in his own hands to make or unmake. The past, the voice of
Providence, has counselled him: 'Leave it alone, leave it alone, little
fly. Go away from there.' Does he heed the warning? Does he heed it,
ladies and gentlemen? Does he? Ah, no! He springs into the air, decides
between the two attractions, one of them, so deadly to his interests
and--_drops upon the fly-paper to perish miserably_! The future is in
his hands no longer. We must lie upon the bed that we have made, nor can
Providence change its unalterable decrees.”

After the tragedy, the orator took a swallow of water, mopped his brow
with the figured handkerchief and announced that a new point herewith
presented itself for consideration. The audience sank back with a gasp
of release from the strain of attention. Minnie Briscoe, leaning back,
breathless like the others, became conscious that a tremor agitated
her visitor. Miss Sherwood had bent her head behind the shelter of the
judge's broad shoulders; was shaking slightly and had covered her face
with her hands.

“What is it, Helen?” whispered Miss Briscoe, anxiously. “What is it? Is
something the matter?”

“Nothing. Nothing, dear.” She dropped her hands from her face. Her
cheeks were deep crimson, and she bit her lip with determination.

“Oh, but there is! Why, you've tears in your eyes. Are you faint? What
is it?”

“It is only--only----” Miss Sherwood choked, then cast a swift glance at
the profile of the melancholy young man. The perfectly dismal decorum of
this gentleman seemed to inspire her to maintain her own gravity. “It
is only that it seemed such a pity about that fly,” she explained. From
where they sat the journalistic silhouette was plainly visible, and both
Fisbee and Miss Sherwood looked toward it often, the former with the
wistful, apologetic fidelity one sees in the eyes of an old setter
watching his master.

When the lecture was over many of the audience pressed forward to shake
the Hon. Mr. Halloway's hand. Tom Martin hooked his arm in that of the
sallow gentleman and passed out with him.

“Mighty humanizin' view Kedge took of that there insect,” remarked Mr.
Martin. “I don't recollect I ever heard of no mournfuller error
than that'n. I noticed you spoke of Halloway as a 'thinker,' without
mentioning what kind. I didn't know, before, that you were as cautious a
man as that.”

“Does your satire find nothing sacred, Martin?” returned the other, “not
even the Honorable Kedge Halloway?”

“I wouldn't presume,” replied old Tom, “to make light of the catastrophe
that overtook the heedless fly. When Halloway went on to other subjects
I was so busy picturin' the last moments of that closin' life, stuck
there in the fly-paper, I couldn't listen to him. But there's no use
dwellin' on a sorrow we can't help. Look at the moon; it's full enough
to cheer us up.” They had emerged from the court-house and paused on
the street as the stream of townsfolk divided and passed by them to take
different routes leading from the Square. Not far away, some people were
getting into a buckboard. Fisbee and Miss Sherwood were already on the
rear seat.

“Who's with him, to-night, Mr. Fisbee?” asked Judge Briscoe in a low
voice.

“No one. He is going directly to the office. To-morrow is Thursday, one
of our days of publication.”

“Oh, then it's all right. Climb in, Minnie, we're waiting for you.” The
judge offered his hand to his daughter.

“In a moment, father,” she answered. “I'm going to ask him to call,” she
said to the other girl.

“But won't he--”

Miss Briscoe laughed. “He never comes to see me!” She walked over
to where Martin and the young man were looking up at the moon, and
addressed the journalist.

“I've been trying to get a chance to speak to you for a week,” she said,
offering him her hand; “I wanted to tell you I had a friend coming to
visit me Won't you come to see us? She's here.”

The young man bowed. “Thank you,” he answered. “Thank you, very much. I
shall be very glad.” His tone had the meaningless quality of perfunctory
courtesy; Miss Briscoe detected only the courtesy; but the strange lady
marked the lack of intention in his words.

“Don't you include me, Minnie?” inquired Mr Martin, plaintively. “I'll
try not to be too fascinatin', so as to give our young friend a show. It
was love at first sight with me. I give Miss Seliny warning soon as your
folks come in and I got a good look at the lady.”

As the buckboard drove away, Miss Sherwood, who had been gazing
steadfastly at the two figures still standing in the street, the tall
ungainly old one, and the taller, loosely-held young one (he had not
turned to look at her) withdrew her eyes from them, bent them seriously
upon Fisbee, and asked: “What did you mean when you said no one was with
him to-night?”

“That no one was watching him,” he answered.

“Watching him? I don't understand.”

“Yes; he has been shot at from the woods at night and----”

The girl shivered. “But who watches him?”

“The young men of the town. He has a habit of taking long walks after
dark, and he is heedless of all remonstrance. He laughs at the idea
of curtailing the limit of his strolls or keeping within the town when
night has fallen; so the young men have organized a guard for him, and
every evening one of them follows him until he goes to the office to
work for the night. It is a different young man every evening, and the
watcher follows at a distance so that he does not suspect.”

“But how many people know of this arrangement?”

“Nearly every one in the county except the Cross-Roads people, though it
is not improbable that they have discovered it.”

“And has no one told him”

“No; it would annoy him; he would not allow it to continue. He will not
even arm himself.”

“They follow and watch him night after night, and every one knows and no
one tells him? Oh, I must say,” cried the girl, “I think these are good
people.”

The stalwart old man on the front seat shook out the reins and whined
the whip over his roans' backs. “They are the people of your State and
mine. Miss Sherwood,” he said in his hearty voice, “the best people in
God's world--and I'm not running for Congress, either!”

“But how about the Six-Cross-Roads people, father?” asked Minnie.

“We'll wipe them clean out some day,” answered her father--“possibly
judicially, possibly----”

“Surely judiciously?” suggested Miss Sherwood.

“If you care to see what a bad settlement looks like, we'll drive
through there to-morrow--by daylight,” said Briscoe. “Even the doctor
doesn't insist on being in that neighborhood after dark. They are trying
their best to get Harkless, and if they do----”

“If they do!” repeated Miss Sherwood. She clasped Fisbee's hand gently.
His eyes shone and he touched her fingers with a strange, shy reverence.

“You will meet him to-morrow,” he said.

She laughed and pressed his hand. “I'm afraid not. He wasn't even
interested enough to look at me.”




CHAPTER III. LONESOMENESS

When the rusty hands of the office clock marked half-past four, the
editor-in-chief of the “Carlow County Herald” took his hand out of his
hair, wiped his pen on his last notice from the White-Caps, put on his
coat, swept out the close little entry, and left the sanctum for the
bright June afternoon.

He chose the way to the west, strolling thoughtfully out of town by the
white, hot, deserted Main Street, and thence onward by the country
road into which its proud half-mile of old brick store buildings,
tumbled-down frame shops and thinly painted cottages degenerated. The
sun was in his face, where the road ran between the summer fields, lying
waveless, low, gracious in promise; but, coming to a wood of hickory and
beech and walnut that stood beyond, he might turn his down-bent-hat-brim
up and hold his head erect. Here the shade fell deep and cool on the
green tangle of rag and iron weed and long grass in the corners of the
snake fence, although the sun beat upon the road so dose beside. There
was no movement in the crisp young leaves overhead; high in the boughs
there was a quick flirt of crimson where two robins hopped noiselessly.
No insect raised resentment of the lonesomeness: the late afternoon,
when the air is quite still, had come; yet there rested--somewhere--on
the quiet day, a faint, pleasant, woody smell. It came to the editor of
the “Herald” as he climbed to the top rail of the fence for a seat,
and he drew a long, deep breath to get the elusive odor more
luxuriously--and then it was gone altogether.

“A habit of delicacies,” he said aloud, addressing the wide silence
complainingly. He drew a faded tobacco-bag and a brier pipe from his
coat pocket and filled and lit the pipe. “One taste--and they quit,” he
finished, gazing solemnly upon the shining little town down the road.
He twirled the pouch mechanically about his finger, and then, suddenly
regarding it, patted it caressingly. It had been a giddy little bag,
long ago, satin, and gay with embroidery in the colors of the editor's
university; and although now it was frayed to the verge of tatters, it
still bore an air of pristine jauntiness, an air of which its owner in
no wise partook. He looked from it over the fields toward the town in
the clear distance and sighed softly as he put the pouch back in his
pocket, and, resting his arm on his knee and his chin in his hand, sat
blowing clouds of smoke out of the shade into the sunshine, absently
watching the ghostly shadows dance on the white dust of the road.

A little garter snake crept under the fence beneath him and disappeared
in the underbrush; a rabbit progressing timidly on his travels by a
series of brilliant dashes and terror-smitten halts, came within a few
yards of him, sat up with quivering nose and eyes alight with fearful
imaginings--vanished, a flash of fluffy brown and white. Shadows grew
longer; the brier pipe sputtered feebly in depletion and was refilled. A
cricket chirped and heard answer; there was a woodland stir of breezes;
and the pair of robins left the branches overhead in eager flight,
vacating before the arrival of a great flock of blackbirds hastening
thither ere the eventide should be upon them. The blackbirds came,
chattered, gossiped, quarrelled, and beat each other with their wings
above the smoker sitting on the top fence rail.

But he had remembered--it was Commencement. To-day, a thousand miles to
the east, a company of grave young gentlemen sat in semi-circular rows
before a central altar, while above them rose many tiers of mothers and
sisters and sweethearts, listening to the final word. He could see it
all very clearly: the lines of freshly shaven, boyish faces, the dainty
gowns, the flowers and bright eyes above, and the light that filtered
in through stained glass to fall softly over them all, with, here and
there, a vivid splash of color, Gothic shaped. He could see the throngs
of white-clad loungers under the elms without, under-classmen, bored by
the Latin addresses and escaped to the sward and breeze of the campus;
there were the troops of roistering graduates trotting about arm in arm,
and singing; he heard the mandolins on the little balconies play an old
refrain and the university cheering afterward; saw the old professor he
had cared for most of all, with the thin white hair straggling over his
silken hood, following the band in the sparse ranks of his class. And he
saw his own Commencement Day--and the station at the junction where he
stood the morning after, looking across the valley at the old towers
for the last time; saw the broken groups of his class, standing upon the
platform on the other side of the tracks, waiting for the south-bound
train as he and others waited for the north-bound--and they all sang
“Should auld acquaintance be forgot;” and, while they looked across at
each other, singing, the shining rails between them wavered and blurred
as the engine rushed in and separated them and their lives thenceforth.
He filled his pipe again and spoke to the phantoms gliding over the
dust--“Seven years!” He was occupied with the realization that there had
been a man in his class whose ambition needed no restraint, his promise
was so complete--in the strong belief of the university, a belief
he could not help knowing--and that seven years to a day from his
Commencement this man was sitting on a fence rail in Indiana.

Down the road a buggy came creaking toward him, gray with dust, the top
canted permanently to one side, old and frayed, like the fat, shaggy,
gray mare that drew it; her unchecked, despondent head lowering before
her, while her incongruous tail waved incessantly, like the banner of a
storming party. The editor did not hear the flop of the mare's feet nor
the sound of the wheels, so deep was his reverie, till the vehicle was
nearly opposite him. The red-faced and perspiring driver drew rein, and
the journalist looked up and waved a long white hand to him in greeting.

“Howdy' do, Mr. Harkless?” called the man in the buggy. “Soakin' in the
weather?” He spoke in shouts, though neither was hard of hearing.

“Yes; just soaking,” answered Harkless; “it's such a gypsy day. How is
Mr. Bowlder?”

“I'm givin' good satisfaction, thankye, and all at home. She's in town;
goin' in after her now.”

“Give Mrs. Bowlder my regards,” said the journalist, comprehending the
symbolism. “How is Hartley?”

The farmer's honest face shaded over, a second. “He's be'n steady ever
sence the night you brought him out home; six weeks straight. I'm kind
of bothered about to-morrow--It's show-day and he wants to come in town
with us, and seems if I hadn't any call to say no. I reckon he'll have
to take his chances--and us, too.” He raised the reins and clucked to
the gray mare; “Well, she'll be mad I ain't there long ago. Ride in with
me?”

“No, I thank you. I'll walk in for the sake of my appetite.”

“Wouldn't encourage it _too_ much--livin' at the Palace Hotel,'”
 observed Bowlder. “Sorry ye won't ride.” He gathered the loose ends of
the reins in his hands, leaned far over the dashboard and struck the
mare a hearty thwack; the tattered banner of tail jerked indignantly,
but she consented to move down the road. Bowlder thrust his big head
through the sun-curtain behind him and continued the conversation: “See
the White-Caps ain't got ye yet.”

“No, not yet.” Harkless laughed.

“Reckon the boys 'druther ye stayed in town after dark,” the other
called back; then, as the mare stumbled into a trot, “Well, come out and
see us--if ye kin spare time from the jedge's.” The latter clause seemed
to be an afterthought intended with humor, for Bowlder accompanied it
with the loud laughter of sylvan timidity, risking a joke. Harkless
nodded without the least apprehension of his meaning, and waved farewell
as Bowlder finally turned his attention to the mare. When the flop,
flop of her hoofs had died out, the journalist realized that the day was
silent no longer; it was verging into evening.

He dropped from the fence and turned his face toward town and supper. He
felt the light and life about him; heard the clatter of the blackbirds
above him; heard the homing bees hum by, and saw the vista of white road
and level landscape, framed on two sides by the branches of the grove,
a vista of infinitely stretching fields of green, lined here and there
with woodlands and flat to the horizon line, the village lying in their
lap. No roll of meadow, no rise of pasture land, relieved their serenity
nor shouldered up from them to be called a hill. A second great flock of
blackbirds was settling down over the Plattville maples. As they hung
in the fair dome of the sky below the few white clouds, it occurred to
Harkless that some supping god had inadvertently peppered his custard,
and now inverted and emptied his gigantic blue dish upon the earth,
the innumerable little black dots seeming to poise for a moment, then
floating slowly down from the heights.

A farm-bell rang in the distance, a tinkling coming small and mellow
from far away, and at the lonesomeness of that sound he heaved a long,
mournful sigh. The next instant he broke into laughter, for another bell
rang over the fields, the court-house bell in the Square. The first
four strokes were given with mechanical regularity, the pride of
the custodian who operated the bell being to produce the effect of a
clock-work bell such as he had once heard in the court-house at Rouen;
but the fifth and sixth strokes were halting achievements, as, after
four o'clock, he often lost count on the strain of the effort for
precise imitation. There was a pause after the sixth, then a dubious and
reluctant stroke--seven--a longer pause, followed by a final ring with
desperate decision--eight! Harkless looked at his watch; it was twenty
minutes of six.

As he crossed the court-house yard to the Palace Hotel, he stopped to
exchange a word with the bell-ringer, who, seated on the steps, was
mopping his brow with an air of hard-earned satisfaction.

“Good-evening, Schofields',” he said. “You came in strong on the last
stroke, to-night.”

“What we need here,” responded the bell-ringer, “is more public-spirited
men. I ain't kickin' on you, Mr. Harkless, no sir; but we want more men
like they got in Rouen; we want men that'll git Main Street paved with
block or asphalt; men that'll put in factories, men that'll act and not
set round like that ole fool Martin and laugh and polly-woggle and make
fun of public sperrit, day in and out. I reckon I do my best for the
city.”

“Oh, nobody minds Tom Martin,” answered Harkless. “It's only half the
time he means anything by what he says.”

“That's jest what I hate about him,” returned the bell-ringer in a tone
of high complaint; “you can't never tell which half it is. Look at him
now!” Over in front of the hotel Martin was standing, talking to the row
of coatless loungers who sat with their chairs tilted back against the
props of the wooden awning that projected over the sidewalk. Their faces
were turned toward the court-house, and even those lost in meditative
whittling had looked up to laugh. Martin, his hands in the pockets of
his alpaca coat, his rusty silk hat tilted forward till the wide brim
rested almost on the bridge of his nose, was addressing them in his
one-keyed voice, the melancholy whine of which, though not the words,
penetrated to the court-house steps.

The bell-ringer, whose name was Henry Schofield, but who was known as
Schofield's Henry (popularly abbreviated to Schofields') was moved to
indignation. “Look at him,” he cried. “Look at him! Everlastingly goin'
on about my bell! Let him talk, jest let him talk.” The supper gong
boomed inside the hotel and Harkless bade the bell-ringer good-night. As
he moved away the latter called after him: “He don't disturb nobody. Let
him talk. Who pays any 'tention to him I'd like to know?” There was a
burst of laughter from the whittlers. Schofields' sat in patient silence
for a full minute, as one who knew that no official is too lofty to
escape the anathemas of envy. Then he sprang to his feet and shook his
fist at Martin, who was disappearing within the door of the hotel. “Go
to Halifax!” he shouted.

The dining-room of the Palace Hotel was a large, airy apartment,
rustling with artistically perforated and slashed pink paper that hung
everywhere, at this season of the year, to lend festal effect as well as
to palliate the scourge of flies. There were six or seven large tables,
all vacant except that at which Columbus Landis, the landlord, sat with
his guests, while his wife and children ate in the kitchen by their own
preference. Transient trade was light in Plattville; nobody ever came
there, except occasional commercial travellers who got out of town the
instant it was possible, and who said awful things if, by the exigencies
of the railway time-table, they were left over night.

Behind the host's chair stood a red-haired girl in a blue cotton gown;
and in her hand she languidly waved a long instrument made of clustered
strips of green and white and yellow tissue paper fastened to a wooden
wand; with this she amiably amused the flies except at such times as the
conversation proved too interesting, when she was apt to rest it on the
shoulder of one of the guests. This happened each time the editor of
the “Herald” joined in the talk. As the men seated themselves they all
nodded to her and said, “G'd evening, Cynthy.” Harkless always called
her Charmion; no one knew why. When he came in she moved around the
table to a chair directly opposite him, and held that station throughout
the meal, with her eyes fixed on his face. Mr. Martin noted this
manoeuvre--it occurred regularly twice a day--with a stealthy smile at
the girl, and her light skin flushed while her lip curled shrewishly
at the old gentleman. “Oh, all right, Cynthy,” he whispered to her, and
chuckled aloud at her angry toss of the head.

“Schofields' seemed to be kind of put out with me this evening,”
 he remarked, addressing himself to the company. “He's the most
ungratefullest cuss I ever come up with. I was only oratin' on how
proud the city ought to be of him. He fairly keeps Plattville's sportin'
spirit on the gog; 'die out, wasn't for him. There's be'n more money
laid on him whether he'll strike over and above the hour, or under and
below, or whether he'll strike fifteen minutes before time, or twenty
after, than--well, sir, we'd all forgit the language if it wasn't for
Schofields' bell to keep us talkin'; that's _my_ claim. Dull days, think
of the talk he furnishes all over town. Think what he's done to promote
conversation. Now, for instance, Anna Belle Bardlock's got a beau, they
say”--here old Tom tilted back in his chair and turned an innocent eye
upon a youth across the table, young William Todd, who was blushing over
his griddle-cakes--“and I hear he's a good deal scared of Anna Belle and
not just what you might call brash with her. They say every Sunday night
he'll go up to Bardlocks' and call on Anna Belle from half-past six till
nine, and when he's got into his chair he sets and looks at the floor
and the crayon portraits till about seven; then he opens his tremblin'
lips and says, 'Reckon Schofields' must be on his way to the court-house
by this time.' And about an hour later, when Schofields' hits four
or five, he'll speak up again, 'Say, I reckon he means eight.' 'Long
towards nine o'clock, they say he skews around in his chair and says,
'Wonder if he'll strike before time or after,' and Anna Belle answers
out loud, 'I hope after,' for politeness; but in her soul she says, 'I
pray before'; and then Schofields' hits her up for eighteen or twenty,
and Anna Belle's company reaches for his hat. Three Sundays ago he
turned around before he went out and said, 'Do you like apple-butter?'
but never waited to find out. It's the same programme every Sunday
evening, and Jim Bardlock says Anna Belle's so worn out you wouldn't
hardly know her for the blithe creature she was last year--the
excitement's be'n too much for her!”

Poor William Todd bent his fiery face over the table and suffered the
general snicker in helpless silence. Then there was quiet for a space,
broken only by the click of knives against the heavy china and the
indolent rustle of Cynthia's fly-brush.

“Town so still,” observed the landlord, finally, with a complacent
glance at the dessert course of prunes to which his guests were helping
themselves from a central reservoir, “Town so still, hardly seems like
show-day's come round again. Yet there's be'n some shore signs lately:
when my shavers come honeyin' up with, 'Say, pa, ain't they no urrands
I can go for ye, pa? I like to run 'em for you, pa,'--'relse, 'Oh, pa,
ain't they no water I can haul, or nothin', pa?'--'relse, as little
Rosina T. says, this morning, 'Pa, I always pray fer _you_ pa,' and
pa this and pa that-you can rely either Christmas or show-day's mighty
close.”

William Todd, taking occasion to prove himself recovered from confusion,
remarked casually that there was another token of the near approach of
the circus, as ole Wilkerson was drunk again.

“There's a man!” exclaimed Mr. Martin with enthusiasm. “There's
the feller for _my_ money! He does his duty as a citizen more
discriminatin'ly on public occasions than any man I ever see. There's
Wilkerson's celebration when there's a funeral; look at the difference
between it and on Fourth of July. Why, sir, it's as melancholy as a
hearse-plume, and sympathy ain't the word for it when he looks at the
remains, no sir; preacher nor undertaker, either, ain't _half_ as blue
and respectful. Then take his circus spree. He come into the store this
afternoon, head up, marchin' like a grenadier and shootin' his hand out
before his face and drawin' it back again, and hollering out, 'Ta, ta,
ta-ra-ta, ta, ta-ta-ra'--why, the dumbest man ever lived could see in
a minute show's 'comin' to-morrow and Wilkerson's playin' the trombone.
Then he'd snort and goggle like an elephant. Got the biggest sense of
appropriateness of any man in the county, Wilkerson has. Folks don't
half appreciate him.”

As each boarder finished his meal he raided the glass of wooden
toothpicks and went away with no standing on the order of his going;
but Martin waited for Harkless, who, not having attended to business so
concisely as the others, was the last to leave the table, and they stood
for a moment under the awning outside, lighting their cigars.

“Call on the judge, to-night?” asked Martin.

“No,” said Harkless. “Why?”

“Didn't you see the lady with Minnie and the judge at the lecture?”

“I caught a glimpse of her. That's what Bowlder meant, then.”

“I don't know what Bowlder meant, but I guess you better go out there,
young man. She might not stay here long.”




CHAPTER IV. THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER

The Briscoe buckboard rattled along the elastic country-road, the roans
setting a sharp pace as they turned eastward on the pike toward home and
supper.

“They'll make the eight miles in three-quarters of an hour,” said the
judge, proudly. He pointed ahead with his whip. “Just beyond that bend
we pass through Six-Cross-Roads.”

Miss Sherwood leaned forward eagerly. “Can we see 'Mr. Wimby's' house
from here?”

“No, it's on the other side, nearer town; we pass it later. It's the
only respectable-looking house in this township.” They reached the turn
of the road, and the judge touched up his colts to a sharper gait. “No
need of dallying,” he observed quietly. “It always makes me a little
sick just to see the place. I'd hate to have a break-down here.”

They came in sight of a squalid settlement, built raggedly about a
blacksmith's shop and a saloon. Half-a-dozen shanties clustered near the
forge, a few roofs scattered through the shiftlessly cultivated fields,
four or five barns propped by fence-rails, some sheds with gaping
apertures through which the light glanced from side to side, a squad of
thin, “razor-back” hogs--now and then worried by gaunt hounds--and
some abused-looking hens, groping about disconsolately in the mire, a
broken-topped buggy with a twisted wheel settling into the mud of the
middle of the road (there was always abundant mud, here, in the dryest
summer), a lowering face sneering from a broken window--Six-Cross-Roads
was forbidding and forlorn enough by day. The thought of what
might issue from it by night was unpleasant, and the legends of the
Cross-Roads, together with an unshapen threat, easily fancied in the
atmosphere of the place, made Miss Sherwood shiver as though a cold
draught had crossed her.

“It is so sinister!” she exclaimed. “And so unspeakably mean! This is
where they live, the people who hate him, is it? The 'White-Caps'?”

“They are just a lot of rowdies,” replied Briscoe. “You have your rough
corners in big cities, and I expect there are mighty few parts of any
country that don't have their tough neighborhoods, only Six-Cross-Roads
happens to be worse than most. They choose to call themselves
'White-Caps,' but I guess it's just a name they like to give themselves.
Usually White-Caps are a vigilance committee going after rascalities the
law doesn't reach, or won't reach, but these fellows are not that kind.
They got together to wipe out their grudges--and sometimes they didn't
need any grudge and let loose their deviltries just for pure orneriness;
setting haystacks afire and such like; or, where a farmer had offended
them, they would put on their silly toggery and take him out at midnight
and whip him and plunder his house and chase the horses and cattle into
his corn, maybe. They say the women went with them on their raids.”

“And he was the first to try to stop them?”

“Well, you see our folks are pretty long-suffering,” Briscoe replied,
apologetically. “We'd sort of got used to the meanness of the
Cross-Roads. It took a stranger to stir things up--and he did. He sent
eight of 'em to the penitentiary, some for twenty years.”

As they passed the saloon a man stepped into the doorway and looked at
them. He was coatless and clad in garments worn to the color of dust;
his bare head was curiously malformed, higher on one side than on the
other, and though the buckboard passed rapidly, and at a distance, this
singular lopsidedness was plainly visible to the occupants, lending an
ugly significance to his meagre, yellow face. He was tall, lean, hard,
powerfully built. He eyed the strangers with affected languor, and then,
when they had gone by, broke into sudden, loud laughter.

“That was Bob Skillett, the worst of the lot,” said the judge. “Harkless
sent his son and one brother to prison, and it nearly broke his heart
that he couldn't swear to Bob.”

When they were beyond the village and in the open road again. Miss
Sherwood took a deep breath. “I think I breathe more freely,” she said.
“That was a hideous laugh he sent after us. I had heard of places
like this before--and I don't think I care to see many of them. As I
understand it, Six-Cross-Roads is entirely vicious, isn't it; and bears
the same relation to the country that the slums do to a city?'”

“That's about it. They make their own whiskey. I presume; and they have
their own fights amongst themselves, but they settle 'em themselves,
too, and keep their own counsel and hush it up. Lige Willetts, Minnie's
friend--I guess she's told you about Lige?--well, Lige Willetts will go
anywhere when he's following a covey, though mostly the boys leave this
part of the country alone when they're hunting; but Lige got into
a thicket back of the forge one morning, and he came on a crowd of
buzzards quarrelling over a heap on the ground, and he got out in a
hurry. He said he was sure it was a dog; but he ran almost all the way
to Plattville.”

“Father!” exclaimed his daughter, leaning from the back seat. “Don't
tell such stories to Helen; she'll think we're horrible, and you'll
frighten her, too.”

“Well, it isn't exactly a lady's story,” said the judge. He glanced at
his guest's face and chuckled. “I guess we won't frighten her much,” he
went on. “Young lady, I don't believe you'd be afraid of many things,
would you? You don't look like it. Besides, the Cross-Roads isn't
Plattville, and the White-Caps have been too scared to do anything much,
except try to get even with the 'Herald,' for the last two years; ever
since it went for them. They're laying for Harkless partly for revenge
and partly because they daren't do anything until he's out of the way.”

The girl gave a low cry with a sharp intake of breath. “Ah! One grows
tired of this everlasting American patience! Why don't the Plattville
people do something before they----”

“It's just as I say,” Briscoe answered; “our folks are sort of used to
them. I expect we do about all we can; the boys look after him nights,
and the main trouble is that we can't make him understand he ought to
be more afraid of them. If he'd lived here all his life he would be.
You know there's an old-time feud between the Cross-Roads and our folks;
goes way back into pioneer history and mighty few know anything of it.
Old William Platt and the forefathers of the Bardlocks and Tibbses and
Briscoes and Schofields moved up here from North Carolina a good
deal just to get away from some bad neighbors, mostly Skilletts and
Johnsons--one of the Skilletts had killed old William Platt's two sons.
But the Skilletts and Johnsons followed all the way to Indiana to join
in making the new settlement, and they shot Platt at his cabin door
one night, right where the court-house stands to-day. Then the other
settlers drove them out for good, and they went seven miles west and set
up a still. A band of Indians, on the way to join the Shawnee Prophet at
Tippecanoe, came down on the Cross-Roads, and the Cross-Roaders bought
them off with bad whiskey and sent them over to Plattville. Nearly all
the Plattville men were away, fighting under Harrison, and when they
came back there were only a few half-crazy women and children left.
They'd hid in the woods.

“The men stopped just long enough to hear how it was, and started for
the Cross-Roads; but the Cross-Roads people caught them in an ambush and
not many of our folks got back.

“We really never did get even with them, though all the early settlers
lived and died still expecting to see the day when Plattville would go
over and pay off the score. It's the same now as it was then, good stock
with us, bad stock over here; and all the country riff-raff in creation
come and live with 'em when other places get too hot to hold them. Only
one or two of us old folks know what the original trouble was about; but
you ask a Plattville man, to-day, what he thinks of the Cross-Roads and
he'll be mighty apt to say, 'I guess we'll all have to go over there
some time and wipe those hoodlums out.' It's been coming to that a long
time. The work the 'Herald' did has come nearer bringing us even with
Six-Cross-Roads than anything else ever has. Queer, too--a man that's
only lived in Plattville a few years to be settling such an old score
for us. They'll do their best to get him, and if they do there'll be
trouble of an illegal nature. I think our people would go over there
again, but I expect there wouldn't be any ambush this time; and the
pioneers, might rest easier in--” He broke off suddenly and nodded to a
little old man in a buckboard, who was turning off from the road into a
farm lane which led up to a trim cottage with a honeysuckle vine by the
door. “That's Mrs. Wimby's husband,” said the judge in an undertone.

Miss Sherwood observed that “Mrs. Wimby's husband” was remarkable for
the exceeding plaintiveness of his expression. He was a weazened, blank,
pale-eyed little man, with a thin, white mist of neck whisker; his coat
was so large for him that the sleeves were rolled up from his wrists
with several turns, and, as he climbed painfully to the ground to open
the gate of the lane, it needed no perspicuous eye to perceive that his
trousers had been made for a much larger man, for, as his uncertain foot
left the step of his vehicle, one baggy leg of the garment fell down
over his foot, completely concealing his boot and hanging some inches
beneath. A faintly vexed expression crossed his face as he endeavored
to arrange the disorder, but he looked up and returned Briscoe's bow,
sadly, with an air of explaining that he was accustomed to trouble, and
that the trousers had behaved no worse than he expected.

No more inoffensive or harmless figure than this feeble little old man
could be imagined; yet his was the distinction of having received a
terrible visit from his neighbors of the Cross-Roads. Mrs. Wimby was a
widow, who owned a comfortable farm, and she had refused every offer
of the neighboring ill-eligible bachelors to share it. However, a
vagabonding tinker won her heart, and after their marriage she continued
to be known as “Mrs. Wimby”; for so complete was the bridegroom's
insignificance that it extended to his name, which proved quite
unrememberable, and he was usually called “Widder-Woman Wimby's
Husband,” or, more simply, “Mr. Wimby.” The bride supplied the needs of
his wardrobe with the garments of her former husband, and, alleging this
proceeding as the cause of their anger, the Cross-Roads raiders, clad
as “White-Caps,” broke into the farmhouse one night, looted it, tore the
old man from his bed, and compelling his wife, who was tenderly devoted
to him, to watch, they lashed him with sapling shoots till he was near
to death. A little yellow cur, that had followed his master on his
wanderings, was found licking the old man's wounds, and they deluged the
dog with kerosene and then threw the poor animal upon a bonfire they had
made, and danced around it in heartiest enjoyment.

The man recovered, but that was no palliation of the offense to the
mind of a hot-eyed young man from the East, who was besieging the county
authorities for redress and writing brimstone and saltpetre for
his paper. The powers of the county proving either lackadaisical or
timorous, he appealed to those of the State, and he went every night to
sleep at a farmhouse, the owner of which had received a warning from
the “White-Caps.” And one night it befell that he was rewarded, for the
raiders attempted an entrance. He and the farmer and the former's
sons beat off the marauders and did a satisfactory amount of damage in
return. Two of the “White-Caps” they captured and bound, and others they
recognized. Then the State authorities hearkened to the voice of the
“Herald” and its owner; there were arrests, and in the course of time
there was a trial. Every prisoner proved an alibi, could have proved a
dozen; but the editor of the “Herald,” after virtually conducting the
prosecution, went upon the stand and swore to man after man. Eight men
went to the penitentiary on his evidence, five of them for twenty years.
The Plattville Brass Band serenaded the editor of the “Herald” again.

There were no more raids, and the Six-Cross-Roads men who were left kept
to their hovels, appalled and shaken, but, as time went by and left them
unmolested, they recovered a measure of their hardiness and began to
think on what they should do to the man who had brought misfortune
and terror upon them. For a long time he had been publishing their
threatening letters and warnings in a column which he headed: “Humor of
the Day.”

“Harkless don't understand the Cross-Roads,” Briscoe said to Miss
Sherwood as they left the Wimby farm behind; “and then he's like most
of us; hardly any of us realizes that harm's ever going to come to _us_.
Harkless was anxious enough about other people, but----”

The young lady interrupted him, touching his arm. “Look!” she said,
“Didn't you see a child, a little girl, ahead of us on the road?”

“I noticed one a minute ago, but she's not there now,” answered Briscoe.

“There was a child walking along the road just ahead, but she turned and
saw us coming, and she disappeared in the most curious way; she seemed
to melt into the weeds at the roadside, across from the elder-bush
yonder.”

The judge pulled in the horses by the elder-bush. “No child here, now,”
 he said, “but you're right; there certainly was one, just before
you spoke.” The young corn was low in the fields, and there was no
hiding-place in sight.

“I'm very superstitious; I am sure it was an imp,” Miss Sherwood said.
“An imp or a very large chameleon; she was exactly the color of the
road.”

“A Cross-Roads imp,” said the judge, lifting the reins, “and in that
case we might as well give up. I never set up to be a match for those
people, and the children are as mean as their fathers, and smarter.”

When the buckboard had rattled on a hundred yards or so, a little figure
clad in a tattered cotton gown rose up from the weeds, not ten feet from
where the judge had drawn rein, and continued its march down the road
toward Plattville, capering in the dust and pursuing the buckboard with
malignant gestures till the clatter of the horses was out of hearing,
the vehicle out of sight.



Something over two hours later, as Mr. Martin was putting things to
rights in his domain, the Dry-Goods Emporium, previous to his departure
for the evening's gossip and checkers at the drug-store, he stumbled
over something soft, lying on the floor behind a counter. The thing
rose, and would have evaded him, but he put out his hands and pinioned
it and dragged it to the show-window where the light of the fading
day defined his capture. The capture shrieked and squirmed and fought
earnestly. Grasped by the shoulder he held a lean, fierce-eyed,
undersized girl of fourteen, clad in one ragged cotton garment, unless
the coat of dust she wore over all may be esteemed another. Her cheeks
were sallow, and her brow was already shrewdly lined, and her eyes were
as hypocritical as they were savage. She was very thin and little, but
old Tom's brown face grew a shade nearer white when the light fell upon
her.

“You're no Plattville girl,” he said sharply.

“You lie!” cried the child. “You lie! I am! You leave me go, will you?
I'm lookin' fer pap and you're a liar!”

“You crawled in here to sleep, after your seven-mile walk, didn't you?”
 Martin went on.

“You're a liar,” she screamed again.

“Look here,” said Martin, slowly, “you go back to Six-Cross-Roads and
tell your folks that if anything happens to a hair of Mr. Harkless's
head every shanty in your town will burn, and your grandfather and
your father and your uncles and your brothers and your cousins and your
second-cousins and your third-cousins will never have the good luck to
see the penitentiary. Reckon you can remember that message? But before
I let you go to carry it, I guess you might as well hand out the paper
they sent you over here with.”

His prisoner fell into a paroxysm of rage, and struck at him.

“I'll git pap to kill ye,” she shrieked. “I don' know nothin' 'bout yer
Six-Cross-Roads, ner no papers, ner yer dam Mister Harkels neither, ner
_you_, ye razor-backed ole devil! Pap'll kill ye; leave me go--leave
me _go_!--Pap'll kill ye; I'll git him to _kill_ ye!” Suddenly her
struggles ceased; her eyes closed; her tense little muscles relaxed and
she drooped toward the floor; the old man shifted his grip to support
her, and in an instant she twisted out of his hands and sprang out of
reach, her eyes shining with triumph and venom.

“Ya-hay, Mister Razor-back!” she shrilled. “How's that fer hi? Pap'll
kill ye, Sunday. You'll be screechin' in hell in a week, an' we 'ull set
up an' drink our apple-jack an' laff!” Martin pursued her lumberingly,
but she was agile as a monkey, and ran dodging up and down the counters
and mocked him, singing “Gran' mammy Tipsy-Toe,” till at last she tired
of the game and darted out of the door, flinging back a hoarse laugh at
him as she went. He followed; but when he reached the street she was
a mere shadow flitting under the courthouse trees. He looked after her
forebodingly, then turned his eyes toward the Palace Hotel. The editor
of the “Herald” was seated under the awning, with his chair tilted back
against a post, gazing dreamily at the murky red afterglow in the west.

“What's the use of tryin' to bother him with it?” old Tom asked himself.
“He'd only laugh.” He noted that young William Todd sat near the editor,
whittling absently. Martin chuckled. “William's turn to-night,” he
muttered. “Well, the boys take mighty good care of him.” He locked the
doors of the Emporium, tried them, and dropped the keys in his pocket.

As he crossed the Square to the drug-store, where his cronies awaited
him, he turned again to look at the figure of the musing journalist. “I
hope he'll go out to the judge's,” he said, and shook his head, sadly.
“I don't reckon Plattville's any too spry for that young man. Five years
he's be'n here. Well, it's a good thing for us folks, but I guess it
ain't exactly high-life for him.” He kicked a stick out of his way
impatiently. “Now, where'd that imp run to?” he grumbled.

The imp was lying under the court-house steps. When the sound of
Martin's footsteps had passed away, she crept cautiously from her
hiding-place and stole through the ungroomed grass to the fence opposite
the hotel. Here she stretched herself flat in the weeds and took from
underneath the tangled masses of her hair, where it was tied with a
string, a rolled-up, crumpled slip of greasy paper. With this in
her fingers, she lay peering under the fence, her fierce eyes fixed
unwinkingly on Harkless and the youth sitting near him.

The street ran flat and gray in the slowly gathering dusk, straight
to the western horizon where the sunset embers were strewn in long,
dark-red streaks; the maple trees were clean-cut silhouettes against the
pale rose and pearl tints of the sky above, and a tenderness seemed to
tremble in the air. Harkless often vowed to himself he would watch no
more sunsets in Plattville; he realized that their loveliness lent a
too unhappy tone to the imaginings and introspections upon which he was
thrown by the loneliness of the environment, and he considered that he
had too much time in which to think about himself. For five years
his introspections had monotonously hurled one word at him: “Failure;
Failure! Failure!” He thought the sunsets were making him morbid. Could
he have shared them, that would have been different.

His long, melancholy face grew longer and more melancholy in the
twilight, while William Todd patiently whittled near by. Plattville
had often discussed the editor's habit of silence, and Mr. Martin had
suggested that possibly the reason Mr. Harkless was such a quiet man was
that there was nobody for him to talk to. His hearers did not agree, for
the population of Carlow County was a thing of pride, being greater
than that of several bordering counties. They did agree, however, that
Harkless's quiet was not unkind, whatever its cause, and that when it
was broken it was usually broken to conspicuous effect. Perhaps it was
because he wrote so much that he hated to talk.

A bent figure came slowly down the street, and William hailed it
cheerfully: “Evening, Mr. Fisbee.”

“A good evening, Mr. Todd,” answered the old man, pausing. “Ah, Mr.
Harkless, I was looking for you.” He had not seemed to be looking for
anything beyond the boundaries of his own dreams, but he approached
Harkless, tugging nervously at some papers in his pocket. “I have
completed my notes for our Saturday edition. It was quite easy; there is
much doing.”

“Thank you, Mr. Fisbee,” said Harkless, as he took the manuscript. “Have
you finished your paper on the earlier Christian symbolism? I hope the
'Herald' may have the honor of printing it.” This was the form they
used.

“I shall be the recipient of honor, sir,” returned Fisbee. “Your kind
offer will speed my work; but I fear, Mr. Harkless, I very much fear,
that your kindness alone prompts it, for, deeply as I desire it,
I cannot truthfully say that my essays appear to increase our
circulation.” He made an odd, troubled gesture as he went on: “They do
not seem to read them here, Mr. Harkless, although Mr. Martin assures me
that he carefully peruses my article on Chaldean decoration whenever he
rearranges his exhibition windows, and I bear in mind the clipping from
a Rouen paper you showed me, commenting generously upon the scholarship
of the 'Herald.' But for fifteen years I have tried to improve the art
feeling in Plattville, and I may say that I have worked in the face
of no small discouragement. In fact,” (there was a slight quaver in
Fisbee's voice), “I cannot remember that I ever received the slightest
word or token of encouragement till you came, Mr. Harkless. Since then
I have labored with refreshed energy; still, I cannot claim that our
architecture shows a change for the better, and I fear the engravings
upon the walls of our people exhibit no great progress in selection.
And--I--I wish also to say, Mr. Harkless, if you find it necessary to
make some alterations in the form of my reportorial items for Saturday's
issue, I shall perfectly understand, remembering your explanation that
journalism demands it. Good-evening, Mr. Harkless. Good-evening, Mr.
Todd.” He plodded on a few paces, then turned, irresolutely.

“What is it, Fisbee?” asked Harkless.

Fisbee stood for a moment, as though about to speak, then he smiled
faintly, shook his head, and went his way. Harkless stared after him,
surprised. It suddenly struck him, with a feeling of irritation, that
if Fisbee had spoken it would have been to advise him to call at Judge
Briscoe's. He laughed impatiently at the notion, and, drawing his pencil
and a pad from his pocket, proceeded to injure his eyes in the waning
twilight by the editorial perusal of the items his staff had just
left in his hands. When published, the manuscript came under a flaring
heading, bequeathed by Harkless's predecessor in the chair of the
“Herald,” and the alteration of which he felt Plattville would refuse to
sanction: “Happenings of Our City.” Below, was printed in smaller type:
“Improvements in the World of Business,” and, beneath that, came the
rubric: “Also, the Cradle, the Altar, and the Tomb.”

The first of Fisbee's items was thus recorded: “It may be noted that
the new sign-board of Mr. H. Miller has been put in place. We cannot but
regret that Mr. Miller did not instruct the painter to confine himself
to a simpler method of lettering.”

“Ah, Fisbee,” murmured the editor, reproachfully, “that new sign-board
is almost the only improvement in the World of Business Plattville has
seen this year. I wonder how many times we have used it from the first,
'It is rumored in business circles that Herve Miller contemplates'--to
the exciting, 'Under Way,' and, 'Finishing Touches.' My poor White
Knight, are five years of training wasted on you? Sometimes you make me
fear it. Here is Plattville panting for our story of the hanging of
the sign, and you throw away the climax like that!” He began to write
rapidly, bending low over the pad in the half darkness. His narrative
was an amplification of the interesting information (already possessed
by every inhabitant) that Herve Miller had put up a new sign. After a
paragraph of handsome description, “Herve is always enterprising,” wrote
the editor. “This is a move in the right direction. Herve, keep it up.”

He glanced over the other items meditatively, making alterations here
and there. The last two Fisbee had written as follows:

“There is noticeable in the new (and somewhat incongruous) portico
erected by Solomon Tibbs at the residence of Mr. Henry Tibbs Willetts,
an attempt at rococo decoration which cannot fail to sadden the
passer-by.”

“Miss Sherwood of Rouen, whom Miss Briscoe knew at the Misses Jennings'
finishing-school in New York, is a guest of Judge Briscoe's household.”

Fisbee's items were written in ink; and there was a blank space beneath
the last. At the bottom of the page something had been scribbled in
pencil. Harkless tried vainly to decipher it, but the twilight had
fallen too deep, and the writing was too faint, so he struck a match
and held it close to the paper. The action betokened only a languid
interest, but when he caught sight of the first of the four subscribed
lines he sat up straight in his chair with an ejaculation. At the bottom
of Fisbee's page was written in a dainty, feminine hand, of a type he
had not seen for years:

          “'The time has come,' the Walrus said,
             'To talk of many things:
           Of shoes--and ships--and sealing-wax--
             And cabbages--and kings--'”

He put the paper in his pocket, and set off rapidly down the village
street.

At his departure William Todd looked up quickly; then he got upon his
feet and quietly followed the editor. In the dusk a tattered little
figure rose up from the weeds across the way, and stole noiselessly
after William. He was in his shirt-sleeves, his waistcoat unbuttoned and
loose. On the nearest corner Mr. Todd encountered a fellow-townsman,
who had been pacing up and down in front of a cottage, crooning to a
protestive baby held in his arms. He had paused in his vigil to stare
after Harkless.

“Whereas he bound for, William?” inquired the man with the baby.

“Briscoes',” answered William, pursuing his way.

“I reckoned he would be,” commented the other, turning to his wife, who
sat on the doorstep, “I reckoned so when I see that lady at the lecture
last night.”

The woman rose to her feet. “Hi, Bill Todd!” she said. “What you got
onto the back of your vest?” William paused, put his hand behind him and
encountered a paper pinned to the dangling strap of his waistcoat. The
woman ran to him and unpinned the paper. It bore a writing. They took it
to where the yellow lamp-light shone through the open door, and read:

           “der Sir
              “FoLer harkls aL yo ples an gaRd him yoR
 best venagesn is closteR, harkls not Got 3 das to liv
                                  “We come in Wite.”

“What ye think, William?” asked the man with the baby, anxiously. But
the woman gave the youth a sharp push with her hand. “They never dast to
do it!” she cried. “Never in the world! You hurry, Bill Todd. Don't you
leave him out of your sight one second.”




CHAPTER V. AT THE PASTURE BARS: ELDER-BUSHES MAY HAVE STINGS

The street upon which the Palace Hotel fronted formed the south side of
the Square and ran west to the edge of the town, where it turned to the
south for a quarter of a mile or more, then bent to the west again. Some
distance from this second turn, there stood, fronting close on the road,
a large brick house, the most pretentious mansion in Carlow County.
And yet it was a homelike place, with its red-brick walls embowered in
masses of cool Virginia creeper, and a comfortable veranda crossing the
broad front, while half a hundred stalwart sentinels of elm and beech
and poplar stood guard around it. The front walk was bordered by
geraniums and hollyhocks; and honeysuckle climbed the pillars of the
porch. Behind the house there was a shady little orchard; and, back of
the orchard, an old-fashioned, very fragrant rose-garden, divided by a
long grape arbor, extended to the shallow waters of a wandering creek;
and on the bank a rustic seat was placed, beneath the sycamores.

From the first bend of the road, where it left the town and became
(after some indecision) a country highway--called the pike--rather than
a proud city boulevard, a pathway led through the fields to end at some
pasture bars opposite the brick house.

John Harkless was leaning on the pasture bars. The stars were wan, and
the full moon shone over the fields. Meadows and woodlands lay quiet
under the old, sweet marvel of a June night. In the wide monotony of
the flat lands, there sometimes comes a feeling that the whole earth is
stretched out before one. To-night it seemed to lie so, in the pathos of
silent beauty, all passive and still; yet breathing an antique message,
sad, mysterious, reassuring. But there had come a divine melody adrift
on the air. Through the open windows it floated. Indoors some one struck
a peal of silver chords, like a harp touched by a lover, and a woman's
voice was lifted. John Harkless leaned on the pasture bars and listened
with upraised head and parted lips.

“To thy chamber window roving, love hath led my feet.”

The Lord sent manna to the children of Israel in the wilderness.
Harkless had been five years in Plattville, and a woman's voice singing
Schubert's serenade came to him at last as he stood by the pasture bars
of Jones's field and listened and rested his dazzled eyes on the big,
white face of the moon.

How long had it been since he had heard a song, or any discourse of
music other than that furnished by the Plattville Band--not that he had
not taste for a brass band! But music that he loved always gave him an
ache of delight and the twinge of reminiscences of old, gay days gone
forever. To-night his memory leaped to the last day of a June gone seven
years; to a morning when the little estuary waves twinkled in the bright
sun about the boat in which he sat, the trim launch that brought a
cheery party ashore from their schooner to the Casino landing at Winter
Harbor, far up on the Maine coast.

It was the happiest of those last irresponsible days before he struck
into his work in the world and became a failure. To-night he saw the
picture as plainly as if it were yesterday; no reminiscence had risen so
keenly before his eyes for years: pretty Mrs. Van Skuyt sitting beside
him--pretty Mrs. Van Skuyt and her roses! What had become of her? He
saw the crowd of friends waiting on the pier for their arrival, and
the dozen or so emblazoned classmates (it was in the time of brilliant
flannels) who suddenly sent up a volley of college cheers in his
honor--how plainly the dear, old, young faces rose up before him
to-night, the men from whose lives he had slipped! Dearest and jolliest
of the faces was that of Tom Meredith, clubmate, classmate, his closest
friend, the thin, red-headed third baseman; he could see Tom's mouth
opened at least a yard, it seemed, such was his frantic vociferousness.
Again and again the cheers rang out, “Harkless! Harkless!” on the end of
them. In those days everybody (particularly his classmates) thought he
would be minister to England in a few years, and the orchestra on the
Casino porch was playing “The Conquering Hero,” in his honor, and at the
behest of Tom Meredith, he knew.

There were other pretty ladies besides Mrs. Van Skuyt in the launch-load
from the yacht, but, as they touched the pier, pretty girls, or pretty
women, or jovial gentlemen, all were overlooked in the wild scramble the
college men made for their hero. They haled him forth, set him on high,
bore him on their shoulders, shouting “Skal to the Viking!” and carried
him up the wooded bluff to the Casino. He heard Mrs. Van Skuyt say,
“Oh, we're used to it; we've put in at several other places where he
had friends!” He struggled manfully to be set down, but his triumphal
procession swept on. He heard bystanders telling each other, “It's that
young Harkless, 'the Great Harkless,' they're all so mad about”; and
while it pleased him a little to hear such things, they always made him
laugh a great deal. He had never understood his popularity: he had
been chief editor of the university daily, and he had done a little in
athletics, and the rest of his distinction lay in college offices his
mates had heaped upon him without his being able to comprehend why they
did it. And yet, somehow, and in spite of himself, they had convinced
him that the world was his oyster; that it would open for him at a
touch. He could not help seeing how the Freshmen looked at him, how the
Sophomores jumped off the narrow campus walks to let him pass; he could
not help knowing that he was the great man of his time, so that “The
Great Harkless” came to be one of the traditions of the university. He
remembered the wild progress they made for him up the slope that morning
at Winter Harbor, how the people baked on, and laughed, and clapped
their hands. But at the veranda edge he had noticed a little form
disappearing around a corner of the building; a young girl running away
as fast as she could.

“See there!” he said, as the tribe set him down, “You have frightened
the populace.” And Tom Meredith stopped shouting long enough to answer,
“It's my little cousin, overcome with emotion. She's been counting the
hours till you came--been hearing of you from me and others for a good
while; and hasn't been able to talk or think of anything else. She's
only fifteen, and the crucial moment is too much for her--the Great
Harkless has arrived, and she has fled.”

He remembered other incidents of his greatness, of the glory that now
struck him as rarely comical; he hoped he hadn't taken it too seriously
then, in the flush of his youth. Maybe, after all, he had been a,
big-headed boy, but he must have bottled up his conceit tightly enough,
or the other boys would have detected it and abhorred him. He was
inclined to believe that he had not been very much set up by the pomp
they made for him. At all events, that day at Winter Harbor had been
beautiful, full of the laughter of friends and music; for there was a
musicale at the Casino in the afternoon.

But the present hour grew on him as he leaned on the pasture bars, and
suddenly his memories sped; and the voice that was singing Schubert's
serenade across the way touched him with the urgent, personal appeal
that a present beauty always had for him. It was a soprano; and without
tremolo, yet came to his ear with a certain tremulous sweetness; it was
soft and slender, but the listener knew it could be lifted with fullness
and power if the singer would. It spoke only of the song, yet the
listener thought of the singer. Under the moon thoughts run into dreams,
and he dreamed that the owner of the voice, she who quoted “The Walrus
and the Carpenter” on Fisbee's notes, was one to laugh with you and weep
with you; yet her laughter would be tempered with sorrow, and her tears
with laughter.

When the song was ended, he struck the rail he leaned upon a sharp blow
with his open hand. There swept over him a feeling that he had stood
precisely where he stood now, on such a night, a thousand years ago, had
heard that voice and that song, had listened and been moved by the song,
and the night, just as he was moved now.

He had long known himself for a sentimentalist; he had almost given up
trying to cure himself. And he knew himself for a born lover; he had
always been in love with some one. In his earlier youth his affections
had been so constantly inconstant that he finally came to settle
with his self-respect by recognizing in himself a fine constancy that
worshipped one woman always--it was only the shifting image of her that
changed! Somewhere (he dreamed, whimsically indulgent of the fancy; yet
mocking himself for it) there was a girl whom he had never seen, who
waited till he should come. She was Everything. Until he found her,
he could not help adoring others who possessed little pieces and
suggestions of her--her brilliancy, her courage, her short upper lip,
“like a curled roseleaf,” or her dear voice, or her pure profile. He had
no recollection of any lady who had quite her eyes.

He had never passed a lovely stranger on the street, in the old days,
without a thrill of delight and warmth. If he never saw her again, and
the vision only lasted the time it takes a lady to cross the sidewalk
from a shop door to a carriage, he was always a little in love with her,
because she bore about her, somewhere, as did every pretty girl he ever
saw, a suggestion of the far-away divinity. One does not pass lovely
strangers in the streets of Plattville. Miss Briscoe was pretty, but not
at all in the way that Harkless dreamed. For five years the lover in
him that had loved so often had been starved of all but dreams. Only at
twilight and dusk in the summer, when, strolling, he caught sight of a
woman's skirt, far up the village street--half-outlined in the
darkness under the cathedral arch of meeting branches--this romancer
of petticoats could sigh a true lover's sigh, and, if he kept enough
distance between, fly a yearning fancy that his lady wandered there.

Ever since his university days the image of her had been growing
more and more distinct. He had completely settled his mind as to her
appearance and her voice. She was tall, almost too tall, he was sure of
that; and out of his consciousness there had grown a sweet and vivacious
young face that he knew was hers. Her hair was light-brown with gold
lustres (he reveled in the gold lustres, on the proper theory that when
your fancy is painting a picture you may as well go in for the whole
thing and make it sumptuous), and her eyes were gray. They were very
earnest, and yet they sparkled and laughed to him companionably; and
sometimes he had smiled back upon her. The Undine danced before him
through the lonely years, on fair nights in his walks, and came to sit
by his fire on winter evenings when he stared alone at the embers.

And to-night, here in Plattville, he heard a voice he had waited for
long, one that his fickle memory told him he had never heard before.
But, listening, he knew better--he had heard it long ago, though when
and how, he did not know, as rich and true, and ineffably tender as now.
He threw a sop to his common sense. “Miss Sherwood is a little thing”
 (the image was so surely tall) “with a bumpy forehead and spectacles,”
 he said to himself, “or else a provincial young lady with big eyes
to pose at you.” Then he felt the ridiculousness of looking after his
common sense on a moonlight night in June; also, he knew that he lied.

The song had ceased, but the musician lingered, and the keys were
touched to plaintive harmonies new to him. He had come to Plattville
before “Cavalleria Rusticana” was sung at Rome, and now, entranced, he
heard the “Intermezzo” for the first time. Listening to this, he feared
to move lest he should wake from a summer-night's dream.

A ragged little shadow flitted down the path behind him, and from a
solitary apple-tree, standing like a lonely ghost in the middle of
the field, came the _woo_ of a screech owl--twice. It was
answered--twice--from a clump of elder-bushes that grew in a
fence-corner fifty yards west of the pasture bars. Then the barrel of a
squirrel rifle issued, lifted out of the white elder-blossoms, and
lay along the fence. The music in the house across the way ceased, and
Harkless saw two white dresses come out through the long parlor windows
to the veranda.

“It will be cooler out here,” came the voice of the singer clearly
through the quiet. “What a night!”

John vaulted the bars and started to cross the road. They saw him from
the veranda, and Miss Briscoe called to him in welcome. As his tall
figure stood out plainly in the bright light against the white dust,
a streak of fire leaped from the elder-blossoms and there rang out the
sharp report of a rifle. There were two screams from the veranda. One
white figure ran into the house. The other, a little one with a gauzy
wrap streaming behind, came flying out into the moonlight--straight to
Harkless. There was a second report; the rifle-shot was answered by
a revolver. William Todd had risen up, apparently from nowhere, and,
kneeling by the pasture bars, fired at the flash of the rifle.

“Jump fer the shadder, Mr. Harkless,” he shouted; “he's in them elders,”
 and then: “Fer God's sake, comeback!”

Empty-handed as he was, the editor dashed for the treacherous elder-bush
as fast as his long legs could carry him; but, before he had taken six
strides, a hand clutched his sleeve, and a girl's voice quavered from
close behind him:

“Don't run like that, Mr. Harkless; I can't keep up!” He wheeled about,
and confronted a vision, a dainty little figure about five feet high, a
flushed and lovely face, hair and draperies disarranged and flying. He
stamped his foot with rage. “Get back in the house!” he cried.

“You mustn't go,” she panted. “It's the only way to stop you.”

“Go back to the house!” he shouted, savagely.

“Will you come?”

“Fer God's sake,” cried William Todd, “come back! Keep out of the road.”
 He was emptying his revolver at the clump of elder, the uproar of his
firing blasting the night. Some one screamed from the house:

“Helen! Helen!”

John seized the girl's wrists roughly; her gray eyes flashed into his
defiantly. “Will you go?” he roared.

“No!”

He dropped her wrists, caught her up in his arms as if she had been a
kitten, and leaped into the shadow of the trees that leaned over the
road from the yard. The rifle rang out again, and the little ball
whistled venomously overhead. Harkless ran along the fence and turned in
at the gate.

A loose strand of the girl's hair blew across his cheek, and in the moon
her head shone with gold. She had light-brown hair and gray eyes and a
short upper lip like a curled rose-leaf. He set her down on the veranda
steps. Both of them laughed wildly.

“But you came with me!” she gasped triumphantly.

“I always thought you were tall,” he answered; and there was afterward a
time when he had to agree that this was a somewhat vague reply.




CHAPTER VI. JUNE

Judge Briscoe smiled grimly and leaned on his shot-gun in the moonlight
by the veranda. He and William Todd had been trampling down the
elder-bushes, and returning to the house, found Minnie alone on the
porch. “Safe?” he said to his daughter, who turned an anxious face upon
him. “They'll be safe enough now, and in our garden.”

“Maybe I oughtn't to have let them go,” she returned, nervously.

“Pooh! They're all right; that scalawag's half-way to Six-Cross-Roads by
this time, isn't he, William?”

“He tuck up the fence like a scared rabbit,” Mr. Todd responded, looking
into his hat to avoid meeting the eyes of the lady. “I didn't have no
call to toller, and he knowed how to run, I reckon. Time Mr. Harkless
come out the yard again, he was near out o' sight, and we see him take
across the road to the wedge-woods, near half-a-mile up. Somebody else
with him then--looked like a kid. Must 'a' cut acrost the field to join
him. They're fur enough towards home by this.”

“Did Miss Helen shake hands with you four or five times?” asked Briscoe,
chuckling.

“No. Why?”

“Because Harkless did. My hand aches, and I guess William's does, too;
he nearly shook our arms off when we told him he'd been a fool. Seemed
to do him good. I told him he ought to hire somebody to take a shot at
him every morning before breakfast--not that it's any joking matter,”
 the old gentleman finished, thoughtfully.

“I should say not,” said William, with a deep frown and a jerk of his
head toward the rear of the house. “_He_ jokes about it enough. Wouldn't
even promise to carry a gun after this. Said he wouldn't know how to use
it. Never shot one off since he was a boy, on the Fourth of July. This
is the third time he's be'n shot at this year, but he says the others
was at a--a--what'd he call it?”

“'A merely complimentary range,'” Briscoe supplied. He handed William a
cigar and bit the end off another himself. “Minnie, you better go in the
house and read, I expect--unless you want to go down the creek and join
those folks.”

“_Me_!” she responded. “I know when to stay away, I guess. Do go and put
that terrible gun up.”

“No,” said Briscoe, lighting his cigar, deliberately. “It's all safe;
there's no question of that; but maybe William and I better go out and
take a smoke in the orchard as long as they stay down at the creek.”

In the garden, shafts of white light pierced the bordering trees and
fell where June roses lifted their heads to breathe the mild night
breeze, and here, through summer spells, the editor of the “Herald” and
the lady who had run to him at the pasture bars strolled down a path
trembling with shadows to where the shallow creek tinkled over the
pebbles. They walked slowly, with an air of being well-accustomed
friends and comrades, and for some reason it did not strike either of
them as unnatural or extraordinary. They came to a bench on the bank,
and he made a great fuss dusting the seat for her with his black slouch
hat. Then he regretted the hat--it was a shabby old hat of a Carlow
County fashion.

It was a long bench, and he seated himself rather remotely toward the
end opposite her, suddenly realizing that he had walked very close to
her, coming down the narrow garden path. Neither knew that neither had
spoken since they left the veranda; and it had taken them a long time to
come through the little orchard and the garden. She rested her chin
on her hand, leaning forward and looking steadily at the creek. Her
laughter had quite gone; her attitude seemed a little wistful and a
little sad. He noted that her hair curled over her brow in a way he had
not pictured in the lady of his dreams; this was so much lovelier. He
did not care for tall girls; he had not cared for them for almost
half an hour. It was so much more beautiful to be dainty and small and
piquant. He had no notion that he was sighing in a way that would have
put a furnace to shame, but he turned his eyes from her because he
feared that if he looked longer he might blurt out some speech about
her beauty. His glance rested on the bank; but its diameter included
the edge of her white skirt and the tip of a little, white, high-heeled
slipper that peeped out beneath it; and he had to look away from that,
too, to keep from telling her that he meant to advocate a law compelling
all women to wear crisp, white gowns and white slippers on moonlight
nights.

She picked a long spear of grass from the turf before her, twisted it
absently in her fingers, then turned to him slowly. Her lips parted
as if to speak. Then she turned away again. The action was so odd, and
somehow, as she did it, so adorable, and the preserved silence was such
a bond between them, that for his life he could not have helped moving
half-way up the bench toward her.

“What is it?” he asked; and he spoke in a whisper he might have used at
the bedside of a dying friend. He would not have laughed if he had known
he did so. She twisted the spear of grass into a little ball and threw
it at a stone in the water before she answered.

“Do you know, Mr. Harkless, you and I haven't 'met,' have we? Didn't we
forget to be presented to each other?”

“I beg your pardon. Miss Sherwood. In the perturbation of comedy I
forgot.”

“It was melodrama, wasn't it?” she said. He laughed, but she shook her
head.

“Comedy,” he answered, “except your part of it, which you shouldn't have
done. It was not arranged in honor of 'visiting ladies.' But you
mustn't think me a comedian. Truly, I didn't plan it. My friend from
Six-Cross-Roads must be given the credit of devising the scene-though
you divined it!”

“It was a little too picturesque, I think. I know about Six-Cross-Roads.
Please tell me what you mean to do.”

“Nothing. What should I?”

“You mean that you will keep on letting them shoot at you, until
they--until you--” She struck the bench angrily with her hand.

“There's no summer theatre in Six-Cross-Roads; there's not even a
church. Why shouldn't they?” he asked gravely. “During the long and
tedious evenings it cheers the poor Cross-Reader's soul to drop over
here and take a shot at me. It whiles away dull care for him, and he has
the additional exercise of running all the way home.”

“Ah!” she cried indignantly, “they told me you always answered like
this!”

“Well, you see the Cross-Roads efforts have proved so purely hygienic
for me. As a patriot I have sometimes felt extreme mortification that
such bad marksmanship should exist in the county, but I console
myself with the thought that their best shots are unhappily in the
penitentiary.”

“There are many left. Can't you understand that they will organize again
and come in a body, as they did before you broke them up? And then, if
they come on a night when they know you are wandering out of town----”

“You have not the advantage of an intimate study of the most exclusive
people of the Cross-Roads, Miss Sherwood. There are about twenty
gentlemen who remain in that neighborhood while their relatives sojourn
under discipline. If you had the entree over there, you would understand
that these twenty could not gather themselves into a company and march
the seven miles without physical debate in the ranks. They are not
precisely amiable people, even amongst themselves. They would quarrel
and shoot each other to pieces long before they got here.”

“But they worked in a company once.”

“Never for seven miles. Four miles was their radius. Five would see them
all dead.”

She struck the bench again. “Oh, you laugh at me! You make a joke of
your own life and death, and laugh at everything! Have five years of
Plattville taught you to do that?”

“I laugh only at taking the poor Cross-Roaders too seriously. I don't
laugh at your running into fire to help a fellow-mortal.”

“I knew there wasn't any risk. I knew he had to stop to load before he
shot again.”

“He did shoot again. If I had known you before to-night--I--” His tone
changed and he spoke gravely. “I am at your feet in worship of your
philanthropy. It's so much finer to risk your life for a stranger than
for a friend.”

“That is rather a man's point of view, isn't it?”

“You risked yours for a man you had never seen before.”

“Oh, no! I saw you at the lecture; I heard you introduce the Honorable
Mr. Halloway.”

“Then I don't understand your wishing to save me.”

She smiled unwillingly, and turned her gray eyes upon him with troubled
sunniness, and, under the kindness of her regard, he set a watch upon
his lips, though he knew it might not avail him. He had driveled along
respectably so far, he thought, but he had the sentimental longings of
years, starved of expression, culminating in his heart. She continued to
look at him, wistfully, searchingly, gently. Then her eyes traveled over
his big frame from his shoes (a patch of moonlight fell on them; they
were dusty; he drew them under the bench with a shudder) to his broad
shoulders (he shook the stoop out of them). She stretched her small
hands toward him in contrast, and broke into the most delicious low
laughter in the world. At this sound he knew the watch on his lips was
worthless. It was a question of minutes till he should present himself
to her eyes as a sentimental and susceptible imbecile. He knew it. He
was in wild spirits.

“Could you realize that one of your dangers might be a shaking?” she
cried. “Is your seriousness a lost art?” Her laughter ceased suddenly.
“Ah, no. I understand. Thiers said the French laugh always, in order not
to weep. I haven't lived here five years. I should laugh too, if I were
you.”

“Look at the moon,” he responded. “We Plattvillains own that with the
best of metropolitans, and, for my part, I see more of it here. You do
not appreciate us. We have large landscapes in the heart of the city,
and what other capital possesses advantages like that? Next winter the
railway station is to have a new stove for the waiting-room. Heaven
itself is one of our suburbs--it is so close that all one has to do is
to die. You insist upon my being French, you see, and I know you
are fond of nonsense. How did you happen to put 'The Walrus and the
Carpenter' at the bottom of a page of Fisbee's notes?”

“Was it? How were you sure it was I?”

“In Carlow County!”

“He might have written it himself.”

“Fisbee has never in his life read anything lighter than cuneiform
inscriptions.”

“Miss Briscoe----”

“She doesn't read Lewis Carroll; and it was not her hand. What made you
write it on Fisbee's manuscript?”

“He was with us this afternoon, and I teased him a little about your
heading. 'Business and the Cradle, the Altar, and the Tomb,' isn't it?
And he said it had always troubled him, but that you thought it good.
So do I. He asked me if I could think of anything that you might like
better, to put in place of it, and I wrote, 'The time has come,' because
it was the only thing I could think of that was as appropriate and as
fetching as your headlines. He was perfectly dear about it. He was so
serious; he said he feared it wouldn't be acceptable. I didn't notice
that the paper he handed me to write on was part of his notes, nor
did he, I think. Afterward, he put it back in his pocket. It wasn't a
message.”

“I'm not so sure he did not notice. He is very wise. Do you know,
somehow, I have the impression that the old fellow wanted me to meet
you.”

“How dear and good of him!” She spoke earnestly, and her face was
suffused with a warm light. There was no doubt about her meaning what
she said.

“It was,” John answered, unsteadily. “He knew how great was my need of a
few moments' companionableness with--with----”

“No,” she interrupted. “I meant dear and good to me, because I think he
was thinking of me, and it was for my sake he wanted us to meet.”

It would have been hard to convince a woman, if she had overheard this
speech, that Miss Sherwood's humility was not the calculated affectation
of a coquette. Sometimes a man's unsuspicion is wiser, and Harkless knew
that she was not flirting with him. In addition, he was not a fatuous
man; he did not extend the implication of her words nearly so far as she
would have had him.

“But I had met you,” said he, “long ago.”

“What!” she cried, and her eyes danced. “You actually remember?”

“Yes; do you?” he answered. “I stood in Jones's field and heard you
singing, and I remembered. It was a long time since I had heard you
sing:

          “'I was a ruffler of Flanders,
             And fought for a florin's hire.
            You were the dame of my captain
             And sang to my heart's desire.'

“But that is the balladist's notion. The truth is that you were a lady
at the Court of Clovis, and I was a heathen captive. I heard you sing a
Christian hymn--and asked for baptism.” By a great effort he managed to
look as if he did not mean it.

But she did not seem over-pleased with his fancy, for, the surprise
fading from her face, “Oh, that was the way you remembered!” she said.

“Perhaps it was not that way alone. You won't despise me for being
mawkish to-night?” he asked. “I haven't had the chance for so long.”

The night air wrapped them warmly, and the balm of the little breezes
that stirred the foliage around them was the smell of damask roses from
the garden. The creek tinkled over the pebbles at their feet, and a
drowsy bird, half-wakened by the moon, crooned languorously in the
sycamores. The girl looked out at the flashing water through downcast
lashes. “Is it because it is so transient that beauty is pathetic?” she
said; “because we can never come back to it in quite the same way? I am
a sentimental girl. If you are born so, it is never entirely teased
out of you, is it? Besides, to-night is all a dream. It isn't real, you
know. You couldn't be mawkish.”

Her tone was gentle as a caress, and it made him tingle to his
finger-tips. “How do you know?” he asked in a low voice.

“I just know. Do you think I'm very 'bold and forward'?” she said,
dreamily.

“It was your song I wanted to be sentimental about. I am like one 'who
through long days of toil'--only that doesn't quite apply--'and nights
devoid of ease'--but I can't claim that one doesn't sleep well here; it
is Plattville's specialty--like one who

           “'Still heard in his soul the music
             Of wonderful melodies.'”

“Those blessed old lines!” she said. “Once a thing is music or poetry,
all the hand-organs and elocutionists in the world cannot ruin it, can
they? Yes; to live here, out of the world, giving up the world, doing
good and working for others, working for a community as you do----”

“I am not quite shameless,” he interrupted, smilingly. “I was given a
life sentence for incompetency, and I've served five years of it, which
have been made much happier than my deserts.”

“No,” she persisted, “that is your way of talking of yourself; I know
you would always 'run yourself down,' if one paid any attention to it.
But to give up the world, to drop out of it without regret, to come
here and do what you have done, and to live the life that must be so
desperately dry and dull for a man of your sort, and yet to have the
kind of heart that makes wonderful melodies sing in itself--oh!” she
cried, “I say that is fine!”

“You do not understand,” he returned, sadly, wishing, before her, to
be unmercifully just to himself. “I came here because I couldn't make
a living anywhere else. And the 'wonderful melodies'--I have known you
only one evening--and the melodies--” He rose to his feet and took a few
steps toward the garden. “Come,” he said. “Let me take you back. Let us
go before I--” he finished with a helpless laugh.

She stood by the bench, one hand resting on it; she stood all in the
tremulant shadow. She moved one step toward him, and a single, long
sliver of light pierced the sycamores and fell upon her head. He gasped.

“What was it about the melodies?” she said.

“Nothing! I don't know how to thank you for this evening that you have
given me. I--I suppose you are leaving to-morrow. No one ever stays
here.--I----”

“What about the melodies?”

He gave it up. “The moon makes people insane!” he cried.

“If that is true,” she returned, “then you need not be more afraid than
I, because 'people' is plural. What were you saying about----”

“I _had_ heard them--in my heart. When I heard your voice to-night, I
knew that it was you who sang them there--had been singing them for me
always.”

“So!” she cried, gaily. “All that debate about a pretty speech!” Then,
sinking before him in a deep courtesy, “I am beholden to you,” she said.
“Do you think that no man ever made a little flattery for me before
to-night?”

At the edge of the orchard, where they could keep an unseen watch on
the garden and the bank of the creek. Judge Briscoe and Mr. Todd were
ensconced under an apple-tree, the former still armed with his shot-gun.
When the two young people got up from their bench, the two men rose
hastily, and then sauntered slowly toward them. When they met, Harkless
shook each of them cordially by the hand, without seeming to know it.

“We were coming to look for you,” explained the judge. “William was
afraid to go home alone; thought some one might take him for Mr.
Harkless and shoot him before he got into town. Can you come out with
young Willetts in the morning, Harkless,” he went on, “and go with the
ladies to see the parade? And Minnie wants you to stay to dinner and go
to the show with them in the afternoon.”

Harkless seized his hand and shook it fervently, and then laughed
heartily, as he accepted the invitation.

At the gate, Miss Sherwood extended her hand to him and said politely,
and with some flavor of mockery: “Good-night, Mr. Harkless. I do not
leave to-morrow. I am very glad to have met you.”

“We are going to keep her all summer if we can,” said Minnie, weaving
her arm about her friend's waist. “You'll come in the morning?”

“Good-night, Miss Sherwood,” he returned, hilariously. “It has been such
a pleasure to meet you. Thank you so much for saving my life. It was
very good of you indeed. Yes, in the morning. Good-night--good-night.”
 He shook hands with them all again, including Mr. Todd, who was going
with him.

He laughed most of the way home, and Mr. Todd walked at his side in
amazement. The Herald Building was a decrepit frame structure on Main
Street; it had once been a small warehouse and was now sadly in need of
paint. Closely adjoining it, in a large, blank-looking yard, stood a low
brick cottage, over which the second story of the warehouse leaned in an
effect of tipsy affection that had reminded Harkless, when he first saw
it, of an old Sunday-school book wood-cut of an inebriated parent under
convoy of a devoted child. The title to these two buildings and the
blank yard had been included in the purchase of the “Herald”; and the
cottage was Harkless's home.

There was a light burning upstairs in the “Herald” office. From the
street a broad, tumble-down stairway ran up on the outside of the
building to the second floor, and at the stairway railing John turned
and shook his companion warmly by the hand.

“Good-night, William,” he said. “It was plucky of you to join in that
muss, to-night. I shan't forget it.”

“I jest happened to come along,” replied the other, drowsily; then, with
a portentous yawn, he asked: “Ain't ye goin' to bed?”

“No; Parker wouldn't allow it.”

“Well,” observed William, with another yawn, which bade fair to expose
the veritable soul of him, “I d'know how ye stand it. It's closte on
eleven o'clock. Good-night.”

John went up the steps, singing aloud:

          “For to-night we'll merry, merry be,
           For to-night we'll merry, merry be,”

and stopped on the sagging platform at the top of the stairs and gave
the moon good-night with a wave of the hand and friendly laughter. At
that it suddenly struck him that he was twenty-nine years of age;
that he had laughed a great deal that evening; that he had laughed and
laughed over things not in the least humorous, like an excited schoolboy
making his first formal call; that he had shaken hands with Miss Briscoe
when he left her, as if he should never see her again; that he had taken
Miss Sherwood's hand twice in one very temporary parting; that he had
shaken the judge's hand five times, and William's four!

“Idiot!” he cried. “What has happened to me?” Then he shook his fist at
the moon and went in to work--he thought.




CHAPTER VII. MORNING: “SOME IN RAGS AND SOME IN TAGS AND SOME IN VELVET
GOWNS”

The bright sun of circus-day shone into Harkless's window, and he awoke
to find himself smiling. For a little while he lay content, drowsily
wondering why he smiled, only knowing that there was something new.
It was thus, as a boy, he had wakened on his birthday mornings, or on
Christmas, or on the Fourth of July, drifting happily out of pleasant
dreams into the consciousness of long-awaited delights that had come
true, yet lying only half-awake in a cheerful borderland, leaving
happiness undefined.

The morning breeze was fluttering at his window blind; a honeysuckle
vine tapped lightly on the pane. Birds were trilling, warbling,
whistling. From the street came the rumbling of wagons, merry cries of
greeting, and the barking of dogs. What was it made him feel so young
and strong and light-hearted? The breeze brought him the smell of
June roses, fresh and sweet with dew, and then he knew why he had come
smiling from his dreams. He would go a holiday-making. With that he
leaped out of bed, and shouted loudly: “Zen! Hello, Xenophon!”

In answer, an ancient, very black darky put his head in at the door, his
warped and wrinkled visage showing under his grizzled hair like charred
paper in a fall of pine ashes. He said: “Good-mawn', suh. Yessuh. Hit's
done pump' full. Good-mawn', suh.”

A few moments later, the colored man, seated on the front steps of the
cottage, heard a mighty splashing within, while the rafters rang with
stentorian song:

       “He promised to buy me a bunch o' blue ribbon,
        He promised to buy me a bunch o' blue ribbon,
        He promised to buy me a bunch o' blue ribbon,
             To tie up my bonny brown hair

       “Oh dear! What can the matter be?
        Oh dear! What can the matter be?
        Oh dear! What can the matter be?
             Johnnie's so long at the Fair!”

At the sound of this complaint, delivered in a manly voice, the
listener's jaw dropped, and his mouth opened and stayed open. “_Him!_”
 he muttered, faintly. “_Singin'_!”

    “Well, the old Triangle knew the music of our tread;
     How the peaceful Seminole would tremble in his bed!”

sang the editor. “I dunno huccome it,” exclaimed the old man, “an' dat
ain' hyer ner dar; but, bless Gawd! de young man' happy!” A thought
struck him suddenly, and he scratched his head. “Maybe he goin' away,”
 he said, querulously. “What become o' ole Zen?” The splashing ceased,
but not the voice, which struck into a noble marching chorus. “Oh, my
Lawd,” said the colored man, “I pray you listen at dat!”

           “Soldiers marching up the street,
             They keep the time;
             They look sublime!
            Hear them play Die Wacht am Rhein!
             They call them Schneider's Band.
               Tra la la la, la!”

The length of Main Street and all the Square resounded with the rattle
of vehicles of every kind. Since earliest dawn they had been pouring
into the village, a long procession on every country road. There were
great red and blue farm wagons, drawn by splendid Clydesdales; the
elders of the family on the front seat and on boards laid from side to
side in front, or on chairs placed close behind, while, in the deep beds
back of these, children tumbled in the straw, or peeped over the sides,
rosy-cheeked and laughing, eyes alight with blissful anticipations.
There were more pretentious two-seated cut-unders and stout buckboards,
loaded down with merrymakers, four on a seat meant for two; there were
rattle-trap phaetons and comfortable carry-alls drawn by steady spans;
and, now and then, mule teams bringing happy negroes, ready to squander
all on the first Georgia watermelons and cider. Every vehicle contained
heaping baskets of good things to eat (the previous night had been a
woeful Bartholomew for Carlow chickens) and underneath, where the dogs
paced faithfully, swung buckets and fodder for the horses, while colts
innumerable trotted dose to the maternal flanks, viewing the world with
their big, new eyes in frisky surprise.

Here and there the trim side-bar buggy of some prosperous farmer's
son, escorting his sweetheart, flashed along the road, the young mare
stepping out in pride of blood to pass the line of wagons, the youth who
held the reins, resplendent in Sunday best and even better, his scorched
brown face glowing with a fine belief in the superiority of both his
steed and his lady; the latter beaming out upon life and rejoicing in
the light-blue ribbons on her hat, the light-blue ribbon around her
waist, the light-blue, silk half-mittens on her hands, and the beautiful
red coral necklace about her neck and the red coral buttons that
fastened her gown in the back.

The air was full of exhilaration; everybody was laughing and shouting
and calling greetings; for Carlow County was turning out, and from far
and near the country people came; nay, from over the county line, clouds
of dust rising from every thoroughfare and highway, and sweeping into
town to herald their coming.

Dibb Zane, the “sprinkling contractor,” had been at work with the town
water-cart since the morning stars were bright, but he might as well
have watered the streets with his tears, which, indeed, when the farmers
began to come in, bringing their cyclones of dust, he drew nigh unto,
after a spell of profanity as futile as his cart.

           “Tief wie das Meer soll deine Liebe sein,”

hummed the editor in the cottage. His song had taken on a reflective
tone as that of one who cons a problem, or musically ponders which card
to play. He was kneeling before an old trunk in his bedchamber. From
one compartment he took a neatly folded pair of duck trousers and a
light-gray tweed coat; from another, a straw hat with a ribbon of bright
colors. They had lain in the trunk a long time undisturbed; and he
examined them musingly. He shook the coat and brushed it; then he laid
the garments upon his bed, and proceeded to shave himself carefully,
after which he donned the white trousers, the gray coat, and, rummaging
in the trunk again, found a gay pink cravat, which he fastened about his
tall collar (also a resurrection from the trunk) with a pearl pin.
After that he had a long, solemn time arranging his hair with a pair
of brushes. When at last he was suited, and his dressing completed, he
sallied forth to breakfast.

Xenophon stared after him as he went out of the gate whistling heartily.
The old darky lifted his hands, palms outward.

“Lan' name, who dat!” he exclaimed aloud. “Who dat in dem pan-jingeries?
He jine' de circus?” His hands fell upon his knees, and he got to his
feet pneumatically, shaking his head with foreboding. “Honey, honey,
hit' baid luck, baid luck sing 'fo' breakfus. Trouble 'fo' de day be
done. Trouble, honey, gre't trouble. Baid luck, baid luck!”

Along the Square the passing of the editor in his cool equipment evoked
some gasps of astonishment; and Mr. Tibbs and his sister rushed from the
postoffice to stare after him.

“He looks just beautiful, Solomon,” said Miss Tibbs.

“But what's the name for them kind of clothes?” inquired her brother.
“'Seems to me there's a special way of callin' 'em. 'Seems as if I see
a picture of 'em, somewheres. Wasn't it on the cover of that there
long-tennis box we bought and put in the window, and the country people
thought it was a seining outfit?”

“It was a game, the catalogue said,” observed Miss Selina. “Wasn't it?”

“It was a mighty pore investment,” the postmaster answered.

As Harkless approached the hotel, a decrepit old man, in a vast straw
hat and a linen duster much too large for him, came haltingly forward
to meet him. He was Widow-Woman Wimby's husband. And, as did every one
else, he spoke of his wife by the name of her former martial companion.

“Be'n a-lookin' fer you, Mr. Harkless,” he said in a shaking spindle of
a voice, as plaintive as his pale little eyes. “Mother Wimby, she sent
some roses to ye. Cynthy's fixin' 'em on yer table. I'm well as ever
I am; but her, she's too complaining to come in fer show-day. This
morning, early, we see some the Cross-Roads folks pass the place towards
town, an' she sent me in to tell ye. Oh, I knowed ye'd laugh. Says she,
'He's too much of a man to be skeered,' says she, 'these here tall, big
men always 'low nothin' on earth kin hurt 'em,' says she, 'but you tell
him to be keerful,' says she; an' I see Bill Skillett an' his brother on
the Square lessun a half-an-hour ago, 'th my own eyes. I won't keep ye
from yer breakfast.--Eph Watts is in there, eatin'. He's come back; but
I guess I don't need to warn ye agin' him. He seems peaceable enough.
It's the other folks you got to look out fer.”

He limped away. The editor waved his hand to him from the door, but the
old fellow shook his head, and made a warning, friendly gesture with his
arm.

Harkless usually ate his breakfast alone, as he was the latest riser
in Plattville. (There were days in the winter when he did not reach
the hotel until eight o'clock.) This morning he found a bunch of white
roses, still wet with dew and so fragrant that the whole room was fresh
and sweet with their odor, prettily arranged in a bowl on the table,
and, at his plate, the largest of all with a pin through the stem. He
looked up, smilingly, and nodded at the red-haired girl. “Thank you,
Charmion,” he said. “That's very pretty.”

She turned even redder than she always was, and answered nothing,
vigorously darting her brush at an imaginary fly on the cloth. After
several minutes she said abruptly, “You're welcome.”

There was a silence, finally broken by a long, gasping sigh. Astonished,
he looked at the girl. Her eyes were set unfathomably upon his pink tie;
the wand had dropped from her nerveless hand, and she stood rapt and
immovable. She started violently from her trance. “Ain't you goin'
to finish your coffee?” she asked, plying her instrument again, and,
bending over him slightly, whispered: “Say, Eph Watts is over there
behind you.”

At a table in a far corner of the room a large gentleman in a brown
frock coat was quietly eating his breakfast and reading the “Herald.” He
was of an ornate presence, though entirely neat. A sumptuous expanse of
linen exhibited itself between the lapels of his low-cut waistcoat, and
an inch of bediamonded breastpin glittered there, like an ice-ledge on
a snowy mountain side. He had a steady, blue eye and a dissipated,
iron-gray mustache. This personage was Mr. Ephraim Watts, who, following
a calling more fashionable in the eighteenth century than in the latter
decades of the nineteenth, had shaken the dust of Carlow from his feet
some three years previously, at the strong request of the authorities.
The “Herald” had been particularly insistent upon his deportation, and,
in the local phrase, Harkless had “run him out of town.” Perhaps it was
because the “Herald's” opposition (as the editor explained at the
time) had been merely moral and impersonal, and the editor had always
confessed to a liking for the unprofessional qualities of Mr. Watts,
that there was but slight embarrassment when the two gentlemen met
to-day. His breakfast finished, Harkless went over to the other and
extended his hand. Cynthia held her breath and clutched the back of
a chair. However, Mr. Watts made no motion toward his well-known hip
pocket. Instead, he rose, flushed slightly, and accepted the hand
offered him.

“I'm glad to see you, Mr. Watts,” said the journalist, cordially. “Also,
if you are running with the circus and calculate on doing business here
to-day, I'll have to see that you are fired out of town before noon. How
are you? You're looking extremely well.”

“Mr. Harkless,” answered Watts, “I cherish no hard feelings, and I never
said but what you done exactly right when I left, three years ago. No,
sir; I'm not here in a professional way at all, and I don't want to be
molested. I've connected myself with an oil company, and I'm down here
to look over the ground. It beats poker and fan-tan hollow, though there
ain't as many chances in favor of the dealer, and in oil it's the farmer
that gets the rake-off. I've come back, but in an enterprising spirit
this time, to open up a new field and shed light and money in Carlow.
They told me never to show my face here again, but if you say I stay, I
guess I stay. I always was sure there was oil in the county, and I want
to prove it for everybody's benefit. Is it all right?”

“My dear fellow,” laughed the young man, shaking the gambler's hand
again, “it is all right. I have always been sorry I had to act against
you. Everything is all right! Stay and bore to Corea if you like. Did
ever you see such glorious weather?”

“I'll let you in on some shares,” Watts called after him as he turned
away. He nodded in reply and was leaving the room when Cynthia detained
him by a flourish of the fly-brush. “Say,” she said,--she always called
him “Say”--“You've forgot your flower.”

He came back, and thanked her. “Will you pin it on for me, Charmion?”

“I don't know what call you got to speak to me out of my name,” she
responded, looking at the floor moodily.

“Why?” he asked, surprised.

“I don't see why you want to make fun of me.”

“I beg your pardon, Cynthia,” he said gravely. “I didn't mean to do
that. I haven't been considerate. I didn't think you'd be displeased.
I'm very sorry. Won't you pin it on my coat?”

Her face was lifted in grateful pleasure, and she began to pin the rose
to his lapel. Her hands were large and red and trembled. She dropped
the flower, and, saying huskily, “I don't know as I could do it right,”
 seized violently upon a pile of dishes and hurried from the room.

Harkless rescued the rose, pinned it on his coat himself, and, observing
internally, for the hundredth time, that the red-haired waitress was the
queerest creature in the village, set forth gaily upon his holiday.

When he reached the brick house on the pike he discovered a gentleman
sunk in an easy and contemplative attitude in a big chair behind the
veranda railing. At the click of the gate the lounger rose and disclosed
the stalwart figure and brown, smiling, handsome face of Mr. Lige
Willetts, an habitual devotee of Minnie Briscoe, and the most eligible
bachelor of Carlow. “The ladies will be down right off,” he said,
greeting the editor's finery with a perceptible agitation and the editor
himself with a friendly shake of the hand. “Mildy says to wait out
here.”

But immediately there was a faint rustling within the house: the swish
of draperies on the stairs, a delicious whispering when light feet
descend, tapping, to hearts that beat an answer, the telegraphic
message, “We come! We come! We are near! We are near!” Lige Willetts
stared at Harkless. He had never thought the latter good-looking until
he saw him step to the door to take Miss Sherwood's hand and say in a
strange, low, tense voice, “Good-morning,” as if he were announcing, at
the least: “Every one in the world except us two, died last night. It is
a solemn thing, but I am very happy.”

They walked, Minnie and Mr. Willetts a little distance in front of the
others. Harkless could not have told, afterward, whether they rode,
or walked, or floated on an air-ship to the court-house. All he knew
distinctly was that a divinity in a pink shirt waist, and a hat that was
woven of gauzy cloud by mocking fairies to make him stoop hideously to
see under it, dwelt for the time on earth and was at his side, dazzling
him in the morning sunshine. Last night the moon had lent her a silvery
glamour; she had something of the ethereal whiteness of night-dews in
that watery light, a nymph to laugh from a sparkling fountain, at the
moon or, as he thought, remembering her courtesy for his pretty speech,
perhaps a little lady of King Louis's court, wandering down the years
from Fontainebleau and appearing to clumsy mortals sometimes, of a June
night when the moon was in their heads.

But to-day she was of the clearest color, a pretty girl, whose gray eyes
twinkled to his in gay companionship. He marked how the sunshine was
spun into the fair shadows of her hair and seemed itself to catch a
lustre, rather than to impart it, and the light of the June day drifted
through the gauzy hat, touching her face with a delicate and tender
flush that came and went like the vibrating pink of early dawn. She
had the divinest straight nose, tip-tilted the faintest, most alluring
trifle, and a dimple cleft her chin, “the deadliest maelstrom in the
world!” He thrilled through and through. He had been only vaguely
conscious of the dimple in the night. It was not until he saw her by
daylight that he really knew it was there.

The village hummed with life before them. They walked through shimmering
airs, sweeter to breathe than nectar is to drink. She caught a
butterfly, basking on a jimson weed, and, before she let it go, held it
out to him in her hand. It was a white butterfly. He asked which was the
butterfly.

“Bravo!” she said, tossing the captive craft above their heads and
watching the small sails catch the breeze; “And so you can make little
flatteries in the morning, too. It is another courtesy you should be
having from me, if it weren't for the dustiness of it. Wait till we come
to the board walk.”

She had some big, pink roses at her waist. “In the meantime,” he
answered, indicating these, “I know very well a lad that would be blithe
to accept a pretty token of any lady's high esteem.”

“But you have one, already, a very beautiful one.” She gave him a genial
up-and-down glance from head to foot, half quizzical, but so quick he
almost missed it. And then he was glad he had found the straw hat with
the youthful ribbon, and all his other festal vestures. “And a very
becoming flower a white rose is,” she continued, “though I am a bold
girl to be blarneying with a young gentleman I met no longer ago than
last night.”

“But why shouldn't you blarney with a gentleman, when you began by
saving his life?”

“Or, rather, when the gentleman had the politeness to gallop about
the county with me tucked under his arm?” She stood still and laughed
softly, but consummately, and her eyes closed tight with the mirth of
it. She had taken one of the roses from her waist, and, as she stood,
holding it by the long stem, its petals lightly pressed her lips.

“You may have it--in exchange,” she said. He bent down to her, and she
began to fasten the pink rose in place of the white one on his coat. She
did not ask him, directly or indirectly, who had put the white one there
for him, because she knew by the way it was pinned that he had done it
himself. “Who is it that ev'ry morning brings me these lovely flow'rs?”
 she burlesqued, as he bent over her.

“'Mr. Wimby,'” he returned. “I will point him out to you. You must see
him, and, also, Mr. Bodeffer, the oldest inhabitant--and crossest.”

“Will you present them to me?”

“No; they might talk to you and take some of my time with you away from
me.” Her eyes sparkled into his for the merest fraction of a second,
and she laughed half mockingly. Then she dropped his lapel and they
proceeded. She did not put the white rose in her belt, but carried it.

The Square was heaving with a jostling, goodnatured, happy, and
constantly increasing crowd that overflowed on Main Street in both
directions; and the good nature of this crowd was augmented in the ratio
that its size increased. The streets were a confusion of many colors,
and eager faces filled every window opening on Main Street or the
Square. Since nine o'clock all those of the courthouse had been
occupied, and here most of the damsels congregated to enjoy the
spectacle of the parade, and their swains attended, gallantly posting
themselves at coignes of less vantage behind the ladies. Some of the
faces that peeped from the dark, old court-house windows were
pretty, and some of them were not pretty; but nearly all of them were
rosy-cheeked, and all were pleasant to see because of the good
cheer they showed. Some of the gallants affected the airy and easy,
entertaining the company with badinage and repartee; some were openly
bashful. Now and then one of the latter, after long deliberation,
constructed a laborious compliment for his inamorata, and, after
advancing and propounding half of it, again retired into himself, smit
with a blissful palsy. Nearly all of them conversed in tones that might
have indicated that they were separated from each other by an acre lot
or two.

Here and there, along the sidewalk below, a father worked his way
through the throng, a licorice-bedaubed cherub on one arm, his coat
(borne with long enough) on the other; followed by a mother with the
other children hanging to her skirts and tagging exasperatingly
behind, holding red and blue toy balloons and delectable batons of
spiral-striped peppermint in tightly closed, sadly sticky fingers.

A thousand cries rent the air; the strolling mountebanks and gypsying
booth-merchants; the peanut vendors; the boys with palm-leaf fans for
sale; the candy sellers; the popcorn peddlers; the Italian with the toy
balloons that float like a cluster of colored bubbles above the heads of
the crowd, and the balloons that wail like a baby; the red-lemonade
man, shouting in the shrill voice that reaches everywhere and
endures forever: “Lemo! Lemo! Ice-cole lemo! Five cents, a nickel, a
half-a-dime, the twentiethpotofadollah! Lemo! Ice-cole lemo!”--all the
vociferating harbingers of the circus crying their wares. Timid youth,
in shoes covered with dust through which the morning polish but dimly
shone, and unalterably hooked by the arm to blushing maidens, bought
recklessly of peanuts, of candy, of popcorn, of all known sweetmeats,
perchance; and forced their way to the lemonade stands; and there, all
shyly, silently sipped the crimson-stained ambrosia. Everywhere the
hawkers dinned, and everywhere was heard the plaintive squawk of the toy
balloon.

But over all rose the nasal cadence of the Cheap John, reeking oratory
from his big wagon on the corner: “Walk up, walk up, walk up, ladies and
gents! Here we are! Here we are! Make hay while we gather the moss. Walk
up, one and all. Here I put this solid gold ring, sumptuous and golden,
eighteen carats, eighteen golden carats of the priceless mother of
metals, toiled fer on the wild Pacific slope, eighteen garnteed, I put
this golden ring, rich and golden, in the package with the hangkacheef,
the elegant and blue-ruled note-paper, self-writing pens, pencil and
penholder. Who takes the lot? Who takes it, ladies and gents?”

His tongue curled about his words; he seemed to love them. “Fer a
quat-of-a-dollah! Don't turn away, young man--you feller in the green
necktie, there. We all see the young lady on your arm is a-langrishing
fer the golden ring and the package. Faint heart never won fair wummin'.
There you are, sir, and you'll never regret it. Go--and be happy! Now,
who's the next man to git solid with his girl fer a quat-of-a-dollah?
Life is a mysterus and unviolable shadder, my friends; who kin read its
orgeries? To-day we are here--but to-morrow we may be in jail. Only
a quat-of-a-dollah! We are Seventh-Day Adventists, ladies and gents,
a-givin' away our belongings in the awful face of Michael, fer a
quat-of-a-dollah. The same price fer each-an-devery individual, lady and
gent, man, wummin, wife and child, and happiness to one and all fer a
quat-of-a-dollah!”

Down the middle of the street, kept open between the waiting crowd, ran
barefoot boys, many of whom had not slept at home, but had kept vigil in
the night mists for the coming of the show, and, having seen the muffled
pageant arrive, swathed, and with no pomp and panoply, had returned to
town, rioting through jewelled cobwebs in the morning fields, happy in
the pride of knowledge of what went on behind the scenes. To-night, or
to-morrow, the runaways would face a woodshed reckoning with outraged
ancestry; but now they caracoled in the dust with no thought of the grim
deeds to be done upon them.

In the court-house yard, and so sinning in the very eye of the law,
two swarthy, shifty-looking gentlemen were operating (with some greasy
walnut shells and a pea) what the fanciful or unsophisticated might have
been pleased to call a game of chance; and the most intent spectator of
the group around them was Mr. James Bardlock, the Town Marshal. He
was simply and unofficially and earnestly interested. Thus the eye of
Justice may not be said to have winked upon the nefariousness now under
its vision; it gazed with strong curiosity, an itch to dabble, and (it
must be admitted) a growing hope of profit. The game was so direct and
the player so sure. Several countrymen had won small sums, and one, a
charmingly rustic stranger, with a peculiar accent (he said that him and
his goil should now have a smoot' old time off his winninks--though the
lady was not manifested), had won twenty-five dollars with no trouble at
all. The two operators seemed depressed, declaring the luck against them
and the Plattville people too brilliant at the game.

It was wonderful how the young couples worked their way arm-in-arm
through the thickest crowds, never separating. Even at the lemonade
stands they drank holding the glasses in their outer hands--such are the
sacrifices demanded by etiquette. But, observing the gracious outpouring
of fortune upon the rustic with the rare accent, a youth in a green tie
disengaged his arm--for the first time in two hours--from that of a
girl upon whose finger there shone a ring, sumptuous and golden, and,
conducting her to a corner of the yard, bade her remain there until he
returned. He had to speak to Hartly Bowlder, he explained.

Then he plunged, red-faced and excited, into the circle about the shell
manipulators, and offered, to lay a wager.

“Hol' on there, Hen Fentriss,” thickly objected a flushed young man
beside him, “iss my turn.”

“I'm first. Hartley,” returned the other. “You can hold yer bosses a
minute, I reckon.”

“Plenty fer each and all, chents,” interrupted one of the shell-men.
“Place yer spondulicks on de little ball. Wich is de next lucky one
to win our money? Chent bets four sixty-five he seen de little ball
go under de middle shell. Up she comes! Dis time _we_ wins; Plattville
can't win _every_ time. Who's de next chent?”

Fentriss edged slowly out of the circle, abashed, and with rapidly
whitening cheeks. He paused for a moment, outside, slowly realizing that
all his money had gone in one wild, blind whirl--the money he had earned
so hard and saved so hard, to make a holiday for his sweetheart and
himself. He stole one glance around the building to where a patient
figure waited for him. Then he fled down a side alley and soon was out
upon the country road, tramping soddenly homeward through the dust, his
chin sunk in his breast and his hands clenched tight at his sides. Now
and then he stopped and bitterly hurled a stone at a piping bird on a
fence, or gay Bob White in the fields. At noon the patient figure was
still waiting in the corner of the court-house yard, meekly twisting the
golden ring upon her finger.

But the flushed young man who had spoken thickly to her deserter drew
an envied roll of bankbills from his pocket and began to bet with
tipsy caution, while the circle about the gamblers watched with fervid
interest, especially Mr. Bardlock, Town Marshal.

From far up Main Street came the cry “She's a-comin'! She's a-comin'!”
 and, this announcement of the parade proving only one of a dozen false
alarms, a thousand discussions took place over old-fashioned silver
timepieces as to when “she” was really due. Schofields' Henry was much
appealed to as an arbiter in these discussions, from a sense of his
having a good deal to do with time in a general sort of way; and thus
Schofields' came to be reminded that it was getting on toward ten
o'clock, whereas, in the excitement of festival, he had not yet struck
nine. This, rushing forthwith to do, he did; and, in the elation of the
moment, seven or eight besides. Miss Helen Sherwood was looking down on
the mass of shifting color from a second-story window--whither many
an eye was upturned in wonder--and she had the pleasure of seeing
Schofields' emerge on the steps beneath her, when the bells had done,
and heard the cheers (led by Mr. Martin) with which the laughing crowd
greeted his appearance after the performance of his feat.

She turned beamingly to Harkless. “What a family it is!” she laughed.
“Just one big, jolly family. I didn't know people could be like this
until I came to Plattville.”

“That is the word for it,” he answered, resting his hand on the casement
beside her. “I used to think it was desolate, but that was long ago.” He
leaned from the window to look down. In his dark cheek was a glow Carlow
folk had never seen there; and somehow he seemed less thin and tired;
indeed, he did not seem tired at all, by far the contrary; and he
carried himself upright (when he was not stooping to see under the
hat), though not as if he thought about it. “I believe they are the best
people I know,” he went on. “Perhaps it is because they have been so
kind to me; but they are kind to each other, too; kind, good people----”

“I know,” she said, nodding--a flower on the gauzy hat set to vibrating
in a tantalizing way. “I know. There are fat women who rock and rock
on piazzas by the sea, and they speak of country people as the 'lower
classes.' How happy this big family is in not knowing it is the lower
classes!” “We haven't read Nordau down here,” said John. “Old Tom
Martin's favorite work is 'The Descent of Man.' Miss Tibbs admires
Tupper, and 'Beulah,' and some of us possess the works of E. P. Roe--and
why not?”

“Yes; what of it,” she returned, “since you escape Nordau? I think the
conversation we hear from the other windows is as amusing and quite as
loud as most of that I hear in Rouen during the winter; and Rouen, you
know, is just like any other big place nowadays, though I suppose
there are Philadelphians, for instance, who would be slow to believe a
statement like that.”

“Oh, but they are not all of Philadelphia----” He left the sentence,
smilingly.

“And yet somebody said, 'The further West I travel the more convinced I
am the Wise Men came from the East.'”

“Yes,” he answered. “'From' is the important word in that.”

“It was a girl from Southeast Cottonbridge, Massachusetts,” said Helen,
“who heard I was from Indiana and asked me if I didn't hate to live so
far away from things.” There was a pause, while she leaned out of the
window with her face aside from him. Then she remarked carelessly, “I
met her at Winter Harbor.”

“Do you go to Winter Harbor?” he asked.

“We have gone there every summer until this one, for years. Have you
friends who go there?”

“I had--once. There was a classmate of mine from Rouen----”

“What was his name? Perhaps I know him.” She stole a glance at him. His
face had fallen into sad lines, and he looked like the man who had come
up the aisle with the Hon. Kedge Halloway. A few moments before he had
seemed another person entirely.

“He's forgotten me, I dare say. I haven't seen him for seven years; and
that's a long time, you know. Besides, he's 'out in the world,' where
remembering is harder. Here in Plattville we don't forget.”

“Were you ever at Winter Harbor?”

“I was--once. I spent a very happy day there long ago, when you must
have been a little girl. Were you there in--”

“Listen!” she cried. “The procession is coming. Look at the crowd!” The
parade had seized a psychological moment.

There was a fanfare of trumpets in the east. Lines of people rushed for
the street, and, as one looked down on the straw hats and sunbonnets and
many kinds of finer head apparel, tossing forward, they seemed like surf
sweeping up the long beaches.

She was coming at last. The boys whooped in the middle of the street;
some tossed their arms to heaven, others expressed their emotion by
somersaults; those most deeply moved walked on their hands. In the
distance one saw, over the heads of the multitude, tossing banners and
the moving crests of triumphal cars, where “cohorts were shining in
purple and gold.” She _was_ coming. After all the false alarms and
disappointments, she was coming!

There was another flourish of music. Immediately all the band gave
sound, and then, with blare of brass and the crash of drums, the glory
of the parade burst upon Plattville. Glory in the utmost! The resistless
impetus of the march-time music; the flare of royal banners, of pennons
on the breeze; the smiling of beautiful Court Ladies and great, silken
Nobles; the swaying of howdahs on camel and elephant, and the awesome
shaking of the earth beneath the elephant's feet, and the gleam of his
small but devastating eye (every one declared he looked the alarmed Mr.
Snoddy full in the face as he passed, and Mr. Snoddy felt not at
all reassured when Tom Martin severely hinted that it was with the
threatening glance of a rival); then the badinage of the clown, creaking
along in his donkey cart; the terrific recklessness of the spangled hero
who was drawn by in a cage with two striped tigers; the spirit of the
prancing steeds that drew the rumbling chariots, and the grace of the
helmeted charioteers; the splendor of the cars and the magnificence
of the paintings with which they were adorned; the ecstasy of all this
glittering, shining, gorgeous pageantry needed even more than walking on
your hands to express.

Last of all came the tooting calliope, followed by swarms of boys as it
executed, “Wait till the clouds roll by, Jennie” with infinite dash and
gusto.

When it was gone, Miss Sherwood's intent gaze relaxed--she had been
looking on as eagerly as any child,--and she turned to speak to Harkless
and discovered that he was no longer in the room; instead, she found
Minnie and Mr. Willetts, whom he had summoned from another window.

“He was called away,” explained Lige. “He thought he'd be back before
the parade was over, and said you were enjoying it so much he didn't
want to speak to you.”

“Called away?” she said, inquiringly.

Minnie laughed. “Oh, everybody sends for Mr. Harkless.”

“It was a farmer, name of Bowlder,” added Mr. Willetts. “His son
Hartley's drinking again, and there ain't any one but Harkless can do
anything with him. You let him tackle a sick man to nurse, or a tipsy
one to handle, and I tell you,” Mr. Willetts went on with enthusiasm,
“he is at home. It beats me,--and lots of people don't think college
does a man any good! Why, the way he cured old Fis----”

“See!” cried Minnie, loudly, pointing out of the window. “Look down
there. Something's happened.”

There was a swirl in the crowd below. Men were running around a corner
of the court-house, and the women and children were harking after. They
went so fast, and there were so many of them, that immediately that
whole portion of the yard became a pushing, tugging, pulling, squirming
jam of people.

“It's on the other side,” said Lige. “We can see from the hall window.
Come quick, before these other folks fill it up.”

They followed him across the building, and looked down on an agitated
swarm of faces. Five men were standing on the entrance steps to the
door below, and the crowd was thickly massed beyond, leaving a little
semicircle clear about the steps. Those behind struggled to get closer,
and leaped in the air to catch a glimpse of what was going on. Harkless
stood alone on the top step, his hand resting on the shoulder of the
pale and contrite and sobered Hartley. In the clear space, Jim Bardlock
was standing with sheepishly hanging head, and between him and Harkless
were the two gamblers of the walnut shells. The journalist held in his
hand the implements of their profession.

“Give it all up,” he was saying in his steady voice. “You've taken
eighty-six dollars from this boy. Hand it over.”

The men began to edge closer to the crowd, giving little, swift,
desperate, searching looks from left to right, and right to left, moving
nervously about, like weasels in a trap. “Close up there tight,” said
Harkless, sharply. “Don't let them out.”

“W'y can't we git no square treatment here?” one of the gamblers whined;
but his eyes, blazing with rage, belied the plaintive passivity of his
tone. “We been running no skin. Wy d'ye say we gotter give up our own
money? You gotter prove it was a skin. We risked our money fair.”

“Prove it! Come up here, Eph Watts. Friends,” the editor turned to the
crowd, smiling, “friends, here's a man we ran out of town once, because
he knew too much about things of this sort. He's come back to us again
and he's here to stay. He'll give us an object-lesson on the shell
game.”

“It's pretty simple,” remarked Mr. Watts. “The best way is to pick up
the ball with your second finger and the back part of your thumb as you
pretend to lay the shell down over it: this way.” He illustrated, and
showed several methods of manipulation, with professional sang-froid;
and as he made plain the easy swindle by which many had been duped that
morning, there arose an angry and threatening murmur.

“You all see,” said Harkless, raising his voice a little, “what a simple
cheat it is--and old as Pharaoh. Yet a lot of you stood around and lost
your own money, and stared like idiots, and let Hartley Bowlder lose
eighty-odd dollars on a shell racket, and not one of you lifted a hand.
How hard did you work for what these two cheap crooks took from you?
Ah!” he cried, “it is because you were greedy that they robbed you so
easily. You know it's true. It's when you want to get something for
nothing that the 'confidence men' steal the money you sweat for and
make the farmer a laughing stock. And _you_, Jim Bardlock, Town
Marshal!--you, who confess that you 'went in the game sixty cents'
worth, yourself--” His eyes were lit with wrath as he raised his
accusing hand and levelled it at the unhappy municipal.

The Town Marshal smiled uneasily and deprecatingly about him, and,
meeting only angry glances, hearing only words of condemnation, he
passed his hand unsteadily over his fat mustache, shifted from one
leg to the other and back again, looked up, looked down, and then, an
amiable and pleasure-loving man, beholding nothing but accusation and
anger in heaven and earth, and wishing nothing more than to sink into
the waters under the earth, but having no way of reaching them, finding
his troubles quite unbearable, and unable to meet the manifold eye of
man, he sought relief after the unsagacious fashion of a larger bird
than he. His burly form underwent a series of convulsions not unlike
sobs, and he shut his eyes tightly and held them so, presenting a
picture of misery unequalled in the memory of any spectator. Harkless's
outstretched hand began to shake. “You!” he tried to continue--“you, a
man elected to----”

There came from the crowd the sound of a sad, high-keyed voice,
drawling: “That's a nice vest Jim's got on, but it ain't hardly the
feathers fitten for an ostrich, is it?”

The editor's gravity gave way; he broke into a ringing laugh and turned
again to the shell-men. “Give up the boy's money. Hurry.”

“Step down here and git it,” said the one who had spoken.

There was a turbulent motion in the crowd, and a cry arose, “Run 'em
out! Ride 'em on a rail! Tar and feathers! Run 'em out o' town!”

“I wouldn't dilly-dally long if I were you,” said Harkless, and his
advice seemed good to the shell-men. A roll of bills, which he counted
and turned over to the elder Bowlder, was sullenly placed in his hand.
The fellow who had not yet spoken clutched the journalist's sleeve with
his dirty hand.

“We hain't done wit' youse,” he said, hoarsely. “Don't belief it, not
fer a minute, see?”

The Town Marshal opened his eyes briskly, and placing a hand on each of
the gamblers, said: “I hereby do arrest your said persons, and declare
you my prisoners.” The cry rose again, louder: “Run 'em out! String 'em
up! Hang them! Hang them!” and a forward rush was made.

“This way, Jim. Be quick,” said Harkless, quietly, bending down and
jerking one of the gamblers half-way up the steps. “Get through the hall
to the other side and then run them to the lock-up. No one will stop
you that way. Watts and I will hold this door.” Bardlock hustled his
prisoners through the doorway, and the crowd pushed up the steps, while
Harkless struggled to keep the vestibule clear until Watts got the
double doors closed. “Stand back, here!” he cried; “it's all over. Don't
be foolish. The law is good enough for us. Stand back, will you!”

He was laughing a little, shoving them back with open hand and elbow,
when a small, compact group of men suddenly dashed up the steps
together, and a heavy stick swung out over their heads. A straw hat with
a gay ribbon sailed through the air. The journalist's long arms went
out swiftly from his body in several directions, the hands not open, but
clenched and hard. The next instant he and Mr. Watts stood alone on the
steps, and a man with a bleeding, blaspheming mouth dropped his
stick and tried to lose himself in the crowd. Mr. Watts was returning
something he had not used to his hip-pocket.

“Prophets of Israel!” exclaimed William Todd, ruefully, “it wasn't Eph
Watts's pistol. Did you see Mr. Harkless? I was up on them steps when he
begun. I don't believe he needs as much takin' care of as we think.”

“Wasn't it one of them Cross-Roads devils that knocked his hat off?”
 asked Judd Bennett. “I thought I see Bob Skillett run up with a club.”

Harkless threw open the doors behind him; the hall was empty. “You may
come in now,” he said. “This isn't my court-house.”




CHAPTER VIII. GLAD AFTERNOON: THE GIRL BY THE BLUE TENT-POLE

They walked slowly back along the pike toward the brick house. The
white-ruffed fennel reached up its dusty yellow heads to touch her
skirts as she passed, and then drooped, satisfied, against the purple
iron-weed at the roadside. In the noonday silence no cricket chirped nor
locust raised its lorn monotone; the tree shadows mottled the road with
blue, and the level fields seemed to pant out a dazzling breath, the
transparent “heat-waves” that danced above the low corn and green wheat.

He was stooping very much as they walked; he wanted to be told that
he could look at her for a thousand years. Her face was rarely and
exquisitely modelled, but, perhaps, just now the salient characteristic
of her beauty (for the salient characteristic seemed to be a different
thing at different times) was the coloring, a delicate glow under the
white skin, that bewitched him in its seeming a reflection of the rich
benediction of the noonday sun that blazed overhead.

Once he had thought the way to the Briscoe homestead rather a long walk;
but now the distance sped malignantly; and strolled they never so
slow, it was less than a “young bird's flutter from a wood.” With her
acquiescence he rolled a cigarette, and she began to hum lightly the air
of a song, a song of an ineffably gentle, slow movement.

That, and a reference of the morning, and, perhaps, the smell of his
tobacco mingling with the fragrance of her roses, awoke again the keen
reminiscence of the previous night within him. Clearly outlined before
him rose the high, green slopes and cool cliff-walls of the coast of
Maine, while his old self lazily watched the sharp little waves through
half-closed lids, the pale smoke of his cigarette blowing out under the
rail of a waxen deck where he lay cushioned. And again a woman pelted
his face with handfuls of rose-petals and cried: “Up lad and at 'em!
Yonder is Winter Harbor.” Again he sat in the oak-raftered Casino,
breathless with pleasure, and heard a young girl sing the “Angel's
Serenade,” a young girl who looked so bravely unconscious of the big,
hushed crowd that listened, looked so pure and bright and gentle and
good, that he had spoken of her as “Sir Galahad's little sister.” He
recollected he had been much taken with this child; but he had not
thought of her from that time to this, he supposed; had almost forgotten
her. No! Her face suddenly stood out to his view as though he saw
her with his physical eye--a sweet and vivacious child's face with
light-brown hair and gray eyes and a short upper lip. ... And the
voice....

He stopped short and struck his palms together. “You are Tom Meredith's
little cousin!”

“The Great Harkless!” she answered, and stretched out her hand to him.

“I remember you!”

“Isn't it time?”

“Ah, but I never forgot you,” he cried. “I thought I had. I didn't know
who it was I was remembering. I thought it was fancy, and it was memory.
I never forgot your voice, singing--and I remembered your face too;
though I thought I didn't.” He drew a deep breath. “_That_ was why----”

“Tom Meredith has not forgotten you,” she said, as he paused.

“Would you mind shaking hands once more?” he asked. She gave him her
hand again. “With all my heart. Why?”

“I'm making a record at it. Thank you.”

“They called me 'Sir Galahad's little sister' all one summer because the
Great John Harkless called me that. You danced with me in the evening.”

“Did I?”

“Ah,” she said, shaking her head, “you were too busy being in love with
Mrs. Van Skuyt to remember a waltz with only me! I was allowed to meet
you as a reward for singing my very best, and you--you bowed with the
indulgence of a grandfather, and asked me to dance.”

“Like a grandfather? How young I was then! How time changes us!”

“I'm afraid my conversation did not make a great impression upon you,”
 she continued.

“But it did. I am remembering very fast. If you will wait a moment, I
will tell you some of the things you said.”

The girl laughed merrily. Whenever she laughed he realized that it was
becoming terribly difficult not to tell her how adorable she was. “I
wouldn't risk it, if I were you,” she warned him, “because I didn't
speak to you at all. I shut my lips tight and trembled all over every
bit of the time I was dancing with you. I did not sleep that night,
because I was so unhappy, wondering what the Great Harkless would think
of me. I knew he thought me unutterably stupid because I couldn't
talk to him. I wanted to send him word that I knew I had bored him.
I couldn't bear for him not to know that I knew I had. But he was not
thinking of me in any way. He had gone to sea again in a big boat, the
ungrateful pirate, cruising with Mrs. Van Skuyt.”

“How time _does_ change us!” said John. “You are wrong, though; I did
think of you; I have al----”

“Yes,” she interrupted, tossing her head in airy travesty of the stage
coquette, “you think so--I mean you say so--now. Away with you and your
blarneying!”



And so they went through the warm noontide, and little he cared for the
heat that wilted the fat mullein leaves and made the barefoot boy, who
passed by, skip gingerly through the burning dust with anguished mouth
and watery eye. Little he knew of the locust that suddenly whirred his
mills of shrillness in the maple-tree, and sounded so hot, hot, hot; or
those others that railed at the country quiet from the dim shade around
the brick house; or even the rain-crow that sat on the fence and swore
to them in the face of a sunny sky that they should see rain ere the day
were done.

Little the young man recked of what he ate at Judge Briscoe's good noon
dinner: chicken wing and young roas'n'-ear; hot rolls as light as
the fluff of a summer cloudlet; and honey and milk; and apple-butter
flavored like spices of Arabia; and fragrant, flaky cherry-pie; and
cool, rich, yellow cream. Lige Willetts was a lover, yet he said he
asked no better than to Just go on eating that cherry-pie till a sweet
death overtook him; but railroad sandwiches and restaurant chops might
have been set before Harkless for all the difference it would have made
to him.

At no other time is a man's feeling of companionship with a woman
so strong as when he sits at table with her-not at a “decorated” and
becatered and bewaitered table, but at a homely, appetizing, wholesome
home table like old Judge Briscoe's. The very essence of the thing is
domesticity, and the implication is utter confidence and liking. There
are few greater dangers for a bachelor. An insinuating imp perches on
his shoulder, and, softly tickling the bachelor's ear with the feathers
of an arrow-shaft, whispers: “Pretty nice, isn't it, eh? Rather pleasant
to have that girl sitting there, don't you think? Enjoy having her
notice your butter-plate was empty? Think it exhilarating to hand her
those rolls? Looks nice, doesn't she? Says 'Thank you' rather prettily?
Makes your lonely breakfast seem mighty dull, doesn't it? How would you
like to have her pour your coffee for you to-morrow, my boy? How would
it seem to have such pleasant company all the rest of your life? Pretty
cheerful, eh?”

When Miss Sherwood passed the editor the apple-butter, the casual,
matter-of-course way she did it entranced him in a strange, exquisite
wonderment. He did not set the dish down when she put it in his hand,
but held it straight out before him, just looking at it, until Mr.
Willetts had a dangerous choking fit, for which Minnie was very proud of
Lige; no one could have suspected that it was the veil of laughter. When
Helen told John he really must squeeze a lemon into his iced tea, he
felt that his one need in life was to catch her up in his arms and run
away with her, not anywhere in particular, but just run and run and run
away.

After dinner they went out to the veranda and the gentlemen smoked. The
judge set his chair down on the ground, tilted back in it with his feet
on the steps, and blew a wavery domed city up in the air. He called it
solid comfort. He liked to sit out from under the porch roof, he said;
he wanted to see more of the sky. The others moved their chairs down to
join him in the celestial vision. There had blown across the heaven a
feathery, thin cloud or two, but save for these, there was nothing but
glorious and tender, brilliant blue. It seemed so clear and close one
marvelled the little church spire in the distance did not pierce it;
yet, at the same time, the eye ascended miles and miles into warm,
shimmering ether. Far away two buzzards swung slowly at anchor, half-way
to the sun.

           “'O bright, translucent, cerulean hue,
             Let my wide wings drift on in you,'”

said Harkless, pointing them out to Helen.

“You seem to get a good deal of fun out of this kind of weather,”
 observed Lige, as he wiped his brow and shifted his chair out of the
sun.

“I expect you don't get such skies as this up in Rouen,” said the judge,
looking at the girl from between half-closed eyelids.

“It's the same Indiana sky, I think,” she answered.

“I guess maybe in the city you don't see as much of it, or think as much
about it. Yes, they're the Indiana skies,” the old man went on.

                Skies as blue
        As the eyes of children when they smile at you.'

“There aren't any others anywhere that ever seemed much like them to
me. They've been company for me all my life. I don't think there are any
others half as beautiful, and I know there aren't any as sociable. They
were always so.” He sighed gently, and Miss Sherwood fancied his wife
must have found the Indiana skies as lovely as he had, in the days of
long ago. “Seems to me they _are_ the softest and bluest and kindest in
the world.”

“I think they are,” said Helen, “and they are more beautiful than the
'Italian skies,' though I doubt if many of us Hoosiers realize it;
and--certainly no one else does.”

The old man leaned over and patted her hand. Harkless gasped. “'Us
Hoosiers!'” chuckled the judge. “You're a great Hoosier, young lady! How
much of your life have you spent in the State? 'Us Hoosiers!'”

“But I'm going to be a good one,” she answered, gaily, “and if I'm good
enough, when I grow up maybe I'll be a great one.”

The buckboard had been brought around, and the four young people climbed
in, Harkless driving. Before they started, the judge, standing on the
horse-block in front of the gate, leaned over and patted Miss Sherwood's
hand again. Harkless gathered up the reins.

“You'll make a great Hoosier, all right,” said the old man, beaming upon
the girl. “You needn't worry about that, I guess, my dear.”

When he said “my dear,” Harkless spoke to the horses.

“Wait,” said the judge, still holding the girl's hand. “You'll make a
great Hoosier, some day; don't fret. You're already a very beautiful
one.” Then he bent his white head and kissed her, gallantly. John said:
“Good afternoon, judge”; the whip cracked like a pistol-shot, and the
buckboard dashed off in a cloud of dust.

“Every once in a while, Harkless,” the old fellow called after them,
“you must remember to look at the team.”

The enormous white tent was filled with a hazy yellow light, the warm,
dusty, mellow light that thrills the rejoicing heart because it is
found nowhere in the world except in the tents of a circus--the
canvas-filtered sunshine and sawdust atmosphere of show day. Through the
entrance the crowd poured steadily, coming from the absorptions of
the wild-animal tent to feast upon greater wonders; passing around the
sawdust ellipse that contained two soul-cloying rings, to find seats
whence they might behold the splendors so soon to be unfolded. Every one
who was not buying the eternal lemonade was eating something; and the
faces of children shone with gourmand rapture; indeed, very often the
eyes of them were all you saw, half-closed in palate-gloating over a
huge apple, or a bulky oblong of popcorn, partly unwrapped from its
blue tissue-paper cover; or else it might be a luscious pink crescent of
watermelon, that left its ravisher stained and dripping to the brow.

Here, as in the morning, the hawkers raised their cries in
unintermittent shrillness, offering to the musically inclined the Happy
Evenings Song-book, alleged to contain those treasures, all the latest
songs of the day, or presented for the consideration of the humorous
the Lawrence Lapearl Joke-book, setting forth in full the art of comical
entertainment and repartee. (Schofields' Henry bought two of
these--no doubt on the principle that two were twice as instructive as
one--intending to bury himself in study and do battle with Tom Martin on
his own ground.)

Here swayed the myriad palm-leaf fans; here paraded blushing youth and
rosy maiden, more relentlessly arm-in-arm than ever; here crept
the octogenarian, Mr. Bodeffer, shaking on cane and the shoulder of
posterity; here waddled Mr. Snoddy, who had hurried through the animal
tent for fear of meeting the elephant; here marched sturdy yeomen and
stout wives; here came William Todd and his Anna Belle, the good William
hushed with the embarrassments of love, but looking out warily with
the white of his eye for Mr. Martin, and determined not to sit within a
hundred yards of him; here rolled in the orbit of habit the bacchanal,
Mr. Wilkerson, who politely answered in kind all the uncouth roarings
and guttural ejaculations of jungle and fen that came from the animal
tent; in brief, here came with lightest hearts the population of Carlow
and part of Amo.

Helen had found a true word: it was a big family. Jim Bardlock, broadly
smiling and rejuvenated, shorn of depression, paused in front of the
“reserve” seats, with Mrs. Bardlock on his arm, and called loudly to a
gentleman on a tier about the level of Jim's head: “How are ye? I reckon
we were a _little_ too smart fer 'em, this morning, huh?” Five or six
hundred people--every one within hearing--fumed to look at Jim; but the
gentleman addressed was engaged in conversation with a lady and did not
notice.

“Hi! Hi, there! _Say_! Mr. Harkless!” bellowed Jim, informally. The
people turned to look at Harkless. His attention was arrested and his
cheek grew red.

“_What is it_?” he asked, a little confused and a good deal annoyed.

“I don't hear what ye say,” shouted Jim, putting his hand to his ear.

“_What is it_?” repeated the young man. “I'll kill that fellow
to-night,” he added to Lige Willetts. “Some one ought to have done it
long ago.”

“What?”

“I _say_, WHAT IS IT?”

“I only wanted to say me and you certainly did fool these here Hoosiers
this morning, huh? Hustled them two fellers through the court-house, and
nobody never thought to slip round to the other door and head us off.
Ha, ha! We were jest a _leetle_ too many fer 'em, huh?”

From an upper tier of seats the rusty length of Mr. Martin erected
itself joint by joint, like an extension ladder, and he peered down
over the gaping faces at the Town Marshal. “Excuse me,” he said sadly to
those behind him, but his dry voice penetrated everywhere, “I got up to
hear Jim say 'We' again.”

Mr. Bardlock joined in the laugh against himself, and proceeded with
his wife to some seats, forty or fifty feet distant. When he had settled
himself comfortably, he shouted over cheerfully to the unhappy editor:
“Them shell-men got it in fer you, Mr. Harkless.”

“Ain't that fool shet up _yit_?” snarled the aged Mr. Bodeffer,
indignantly. He was sitting near the young couple, and the expression
of his sympathy was distinctly audible to them and many others. “Got
no more regards than a brazing calf-disturbin' a feller with his
sweetheart!”

“The both of 'em says they're goin' to do fer you,” bleated Mr.
Bardlock. “Swear they'll git their evens with ye.”

Mr. Martin rose again. “Don't git scared and leave town, Mr. Harkless,”
 he called out; “Jim'll protect you.”

Vastly to the young man's relief the band began to play, and the
equestrians and equestriennes capered out from the dressing-tent for the
“Grand Entrance,” and the performance commenced. Through the long
summer afternoon it went on: wonders of horsemanship and horsewomanship;
hair-raising exploits on wires, tight and slack; giddy tricks on the
high trapeze; feats of leaping and tumbling in the rings; while the
tireless musicians blatted inspiringly through it all, only pausing
long enough to allow that uproarious jester, the clown, to ask the
ring-master what he would do if a young lady came up and kissed him on
the street, and to exploit his hilarities during the short intervals of
rest for the athletes.

When it was over, John and Helen found themselves in the midst of a
densely packed crowd, and separated from Miss Briscoe and Lige. People
were pushing and shoving, and he saw her face grow pale. He realized
with a pang of sympathy how helpless he would feel if he were as small
as she, and at his utmost height could only see big, suffocating backs
and huge shoulders pressing down from above. He was keeping them from
crowding heavily upon her with all his strength, and a royal feeling of
protectiveness came over him. She was so little. And yet, without the
remotest hint of hardness, she gave him such a distinct impression of
poise and equilibrium, she seemed so able to meet anything that might
come, to understand it--even to laugh at it--so Americanly capable and
sure of the event, that in spite of her pale cheek he could not feel
quite so protective as he wished to feel.

He managed to get her to one of the tent-poles, and placed her with her
back to it. Then he set one of his own hands against it over her head,
braced himself and stood, keeping a little space about her, ruggedly
letting the crowd surge against him as it would; no one should touch her
in rough carelessness.

“Thank you. It was rather trying in there,” she said, and looked up into
his eyes with a divine gratitude.

“Please don't do that,” he answered in a low voice.

“Do what?”

“Look like that.”

She not only looked like that, but more so. “Young man, young man,” she
said, “I fear you're wishful of turning a girl's head.”

The throng was thick around them, garrulous and noisy, but they two were
more richly alone together, to his appreciation, than if they stood on
some far satellite of Mars. He was not to forget that moment, and he
kept the picture of her, as she leaned against the big blue tent-pole,
there, in his heart: the clear gray eyes lifted to his, the delicate
face with the color stealing back to her cheeks, and the brave little
figure that had run so straight to him out of the night shadows. There
was something about her, and in the moment, that suddenly touched him
with a saddening sweetness too keen to be borne; the forget-me-not
finger of the flying hour that could not come again was laid on his
soul, and he felt the tears start from his heart on their journey to his
eyes. He knew that he should always remember that moment. She knew it,
too. She put her hand to her cheek and turned away from him a little
tremulously. Both were silent.

They had been together since early morning. Plattville was proud of him.
Many a friendly glance from the folk who jostled about them favored his
suit and wished both of them well, and many lips, opening to speak to
Harkless in passing, closed when their owners (more tactful than Mr.
Bardlock) looked a second time.

Old Tom Martin, still perched alone On his high seat, saw them standing
by the tent-pole, and watched them from under his rusty hat brim. “I
reckon it's be'n three or four thousand years since I was young,” he
sighed to himself; then, pushing his hat still further down over his
eyes: “I don't believe I'd ort to rightly look on at that.” He
sighed again as he rose, and gently spoke the name of his dead wife:
“Marjie,--it's be'n lonesome, sometimes. I reckon you're mighty tired
waitin' for me, ever since sixty-four--yet maybe not; Ulysses S. Grant's
over on your side now, and perhaps you've got acquainted with him; you
always thought a good deal more of him than you did of me.”

“Do you see that tall old man up there?” said Helen, nodding her head
toward Martin. “I think I should like to know him. I'm sure I like him.”

“That is old Tom Martin.”

“I know.”

“I was sorry and ashamed about all that conspicuousness and shouting.
It must have been very unpleasant for you; it must have been so, for a
stranger. Please try to forgive me for letting you in for it.”

“But I liked it. It was 'all in the family,' and it was so jolly and
good-natured, and that dear old man was so bright. Do you know,” she
said softly, “I don't think I'm such a stranger--I--I think I love all
these people a great deal--in spite of having known them only two days.”

At that a wild exhilaration possessed him. He wanted to shake hands
with everybody in the tent, to tell them all that he loved them with
his whole heart, but, what was vastly more important, _she_ loved them a
great deal--in spite of having known them only two days!

He made the horses prance on the homeward drive, and once, when she
told him that she had read a good many of his political columns in the
“Herald,” he ran them into a fence. After this it occurred to him that
they were nearing their destination and had come at a perversely sharp
gait; so he held the roans down to a snail's pace (if it be true that a
snail's natural gait is not a trot) for the rest of the way, while they
talked of Tom Meredith and books and music, and discovered that they
differed widely about Ibsen.

They found Mr. Fisbee in the yard, talking to Judge Briscoe. As they
drove up, and before the horses had quite stopped, Helen leaped to the
ground and ran to the old scholar with both her hands outstretched to
him. He looked timidly at her, and took the hands she gave him; then
he produced from his pocket a yellow telegraph envelope, watching
her anxiously as she received it. However, she seemed to attach no
particular importance to it, and, instead of opening it, leaned toward
him, still holding one of his hands.

“These awful old men!” Harkless groaned inwardly as he handed the horses
over to the judge. “I dare say _he_'ll kiss her, too.” But, when the
editor and Mr. Willetts had gone, it was Helen who kissed Fisbee.

“They're coming out to spend the evening, aren't they?” asked Briscoe,
nodding to the young men as they set off down the road.

“Lige has to come whether he wants to or not,” Minnie laughed, rather
consciously; “It's his turn to-night to look after Mr. Harkless.”

“I guess he won't mind coming,” said the judge.

“Well,” returned his daughter, glancing at Helen, who stood apart,
reading the telegram to Fisbee, “I know if he follows Mr. Harkless
he'll get here pretty soon after supper--as soon as the moon comes up,
anyway.”

The editor of the “Herald” was late to his supper that evening. It was
dusk when he reached the hotel, and, for the first time in history, a
gentleman sat down to meat in that house of entertainment in evening
dress. There was no one in the diningroom when he went in; the other
boarders had finished, and it was Cynthia's “evening out,” but the
landlord came and attended to his guests' wants himself, and chatted
with him while he ate.

“There's a picture of Henry Clay,” remarked Landis, in obvious relevancy
to his companion's attire, “there's a picture of Henry Clay somewheres
about the house in a swallow-tail coat. Governor Ray spoke here in one
in early times, Bodeffer says, except it was higher built up 'n yourn
about the collar, and had brass buttons, I think. Ole man Wimby was
here to-night,” the landlord continued, changing the subject. “He
waited around fer ye a good while. He's be'n mighty wrought up sence the
trouble this morning, an' wanted to see ye bad. I don't know 'f you
seen it, but that feller 't knocked your hat off was mighty near tore
to pieces in the crowd before he got away. 'Seems some the boys
re-_cog_-nized him as one the Cross-Roads Skillets, and sicked the dogs
on him, and he had a pretty mean time of it. Wimby says the Cross-Roads
folks'll be worse 'n ever, and, says he, 'Tell him to stick close to
town,' says he. 'They'll do anything to git him now,' says he, 'and
_resk_ anything.' I told him you wouldn't take no stock in it, but, see
here, don't you put nothin' too mean fer them folks. I tell you, Mr.
Harkless, plenty of us are scared fer ye.”

The good fellow was so earnest that when the editor's meal was finished
and he would have departed, Landis detained him almost by force until
the arrival of Mr. Willetts, who, the landlord knew, was his allotted
escort' for the evening. When Lige came (wearing a new tie, a pink one
he had hastened to buy as soon as his engagements had allowed him
the opportunity), Mr. Landis hissed a savage word of reproach for his
tardiness in his ear, and whisperingly bade him not let the other out
of reach that night, to which Willetts replied with a nod implying his
trustworthiness; and the young men set off in the darkness.

Harkless wondered if his costume were not an injustice to his companion,
but he did not regret it; he would wear his best court suit, his laces
and velvets, for deference to that lady. It was a painful thing to
remember his dusty rustiness of the night before, the awful Carlow cut
of his coat, and his formless black cravat; the same felt hat he wore
again to-night, perforce, but it was brushed--brushed almost to holes in
spots, and somehow he had added a touch of shape to it. His dress-coat
was an antique; fashions had changed, no doubt; he did not know;
possibly she would recognize its vintage--but it was a dress-coat.

Lige walked along talking; Harkless answering “Yes” and “No” at random.
The woodland-spiced air was like champagne to him; the road under foot
so elastic and springy that he felt like a thoroughbred before a race;
he wanted to lift his foot knee-high at every step, he had so much
energy to spare. In the midst of a speech of Lige's about the look of
the wheat he suddenly gave out a sigh so deep, so heartfelt, so vibrant,
so profound, that Willetts turned with astonishment; but when his eye
reached his companion's face, Harkless was smiling. The editor extended
his hand.

“Shake hands, Lige,” he cried.

The moon peeped over the shoulder of an eastern wood, and the young
men suddenly descried their long shadows stretching in front of them.
Harkless turned to look at the silhouetted town, the tree-tops and roofs
and the Methodist church spire, silvered at the edges.

“Do you see that town, Willetts?” he asked, laying his fingers on his
companion's sleeve. “That's the best town in the United States!”

“I always kind of thought you didn't much like it,” said the other,
puzzled. “Seemed to me you always sort of wished you hadn't settled
here.”

A little further on they passed Mr. Fisbee. He was walking into the
village with his head thrown back, a strange thing for him. They gave
him a friendly greeting and passed on.

“Well, it beats me!” observed Lige, when the old man was out of hearing.
“He's be'n there to supper again. He was there all day yesterday, and
with 'em at the lecture, and at the deepo day before and he looks like
another man, and dressed up--for him--to beat thunder----What do you
expect makes him so thick out there all of a sudden?”

“I hadn't thought about it. The judge and he have been friends a good
while, haven't they?”

“Yes, three or four years; but not like this. It beats _me_! He's all
upset over Miss Sherwood, I think. Old enough to be her grandfather,
too, the old----”

His companion stopped him, dropping a hand on his shoulder.

“Listen!”

They were at the corner of the Briscoe picket fence, and a sound lilted
through the stillness--a touch on the keys that Harkless knew. “Listen,”
 he whispered.

It was the “Moonlight Sonata” that Helen was playing. “It's a pretty
piece,” observed Lige after a time. John could have choked him, but he
answered: “Yes, it is seraphic.”

“Who made it up?” pursued Mr. Willetts.

“Beethoven.”

“Foreigner, I expect. Yet in some way or another makes me think of
fishing down on the Wabash bend in Vigo, and camping out nights like
this; it's a mighty pretty country around there--especially at night.”

The sonata was finished, and then she sang--sang the “Angel's Serenade.”
 As the soft soprano lifted and fell in the modulations of that song
there was in its timbre, apart from the pure, amber music of it, a
questing, seeking pathos, and Willetts felt the hand on his shoulder
tighten and then relax; and, as the song ended, he saw that his
companion's eyes were shining and moist.




CHAPTER IX. NIGHT: IT IS BAD LUCK TO SING BEFORE BREAKFAST

There was a lace of faint mists along the creek and beyond, when John
and Helen reached their bench (of course they went back there), and
broken roundelays were croaking from a bayou up the stream, where rakish
frogs held carnival in resentment of the lonesomeness. The air was still
and close. Hundreds of fire-flies coquetted with the darkness amongst
the trees across the water, glinting from unexpected spots, shading
their little lanterns for a second to glow again from other shadows. The
sky was a wonderful olive green; a lazy cloud drifted in it and lapped
itself athwart the moon.

“The dead painters design the skies for us each day and night, I think,”
 Helen said, as she dropped a little scarf from her shoulders and leaned
back on the bench. “It must be the only way to keep them happy and busy
'up there.' They let them take turns, and those not on duty, probably
float around and criticise.”

“They've given a good man his turn to-night,” said John; “some quiet
colorist, a poetic, friendly soul, no Turner--though I think I've seen a
Turner sunset or two in Plattville.”

“It was a sculptor's sunset this evening. Did you see it?--great
massy clouds piled heap on heap, almost with violence. I'm sure it was
Michelangelo. The judge didn't think it meant Michelangelo; he thought
it meant rain.”

“Michelangelo gets a chance rather often, doesn't he, considering the
number of art people there must be over there? I believe I've seen a
good many sunsets of his, and a few dawns, too; the dawns not for a
long time--I used to see them more frequently toward the close of senior
year, when we sat up all night talking, knowing we'd lose one another
soon, and trying to hold on as long as we could.”

She turned to him with a little frown. “Why have you never let Tom
Meredith know you were living so near him, less than a hundred miles,
when he has always liked and admired you above all the rest of mankind?
I know that he has tried time and again to hear of you, but the other
men wrote that they knew nothing--that it was thought you had gone
abroad. I had heard of you, and so must he have seen your name in the
Rouen papers--about the 'White-Caps,' and in politics--but he would
never dream of connecting the Plattville Mr. Harkless with _his_ Mr.
Harkless, though _I_ did, just a little, and rather vaguely. I knew, of
course, when you came into the lecture. But why haven't you written to
my cousin?”

“Rouen seems a long way from here,” he answered quietly. “I've only been
there once--half a day on business. Except that, I've never been further
away than Amo or Gainesville, for a convention or to make a speech,
since I came here.”

“Wicked!” she exclaimed, “To shut yourself up like this! I said it was
fine to drop out of the world; but why have you cut off your old friends
from you? Why haven't you had a relapse, now and then, and come over
to hear Ysaye play and Melba sing, or to see Mansfield or Henry Irving,
when we have had them? And do you think you've been quite fair to Tom?
What right had you to assume that he had forgotten you?”

“Oh, I didn't exactly mean forgotten,” he said, pulling a blade of grass
to and fro between his fingers, staring at it absently. “It's only that
I have dropped out of the world, you know. I kept track of every one,
saw most of my friends, or corresponded, now and then, for a year or so
after I left college; but people don't miss you much after a while.
They rather expected me to do a lot of things, in a way, you know, and
I wasn't doing them. I was glad to get away. I always had an itch for
newspaper work, and I went on a New York paper. Maybe it was the wrong
paper; at least, I wasn't fit for it. There was something in the side
of life I saw, too, not only on the paper, that made me heart-sick; and
then the rush and fight and scramble to be first, to beat the other man.
Probably I am too squeamish. I saw classmates and college friends diving
into it, bound to come out ahead, dear old, honest, frank fellows, who
had been so happy-go-lucky and kind and gay, growing too busy to meet
and be good to any man who couldn't be good to them, asking (more
delicately) the eternal question, 'What does it get me?' You might think
I bad-met with unkindness; but it was not so; it was the other way more
than I deserved. But the cruel competition, the thousands fighting for
places, the multitude scrambling for each ginger-bread baton, the cold
faces on the streets--perhaps it's all right and good; of course it has
to _be_--but I wanted to get out of it, though I didn't want to come
_here_. That was chance. A new man bought the paper I was working for,
and its policy changed. Many of the same men still wrote for it, facing
cheerfully about and advocating a tricky theory, vehement champions of a
set of personal schemers and waxy images.”

He spoke with feeling; but now, as though a trifle ashamed of too much
seriousness, and justifiably afraid of talking like one of his own
editorials, he took a lighter tone. “I had been taken on the paper
through a friend and not through merit, and by the same undeserved,
kindly influence, after a month or so I was set to writing short
political editorials, and was at it nearly two years. When the paper
changed hands the new proprietor indicated that he would be willing to
have me stay and write the other way. I refused; and it became somewhat
plain to me that I was beginning to be a failure.

“A cousin of mine, the only relative I had, died in Chicago, and I went
to his funeral. I happened to hear of the Carlow 'Herald' through an
agent there, the most eloquent gentleman I ever met. I was younger, and
even more thoughtless than now, and I had a little money and I handed it
over for the 'Herald.' I wanted to run a paper myself, and to build up a
power! And then, though I only lived here the first few years of my
life and all the rest of it had been spent in the East, I was born in
Indiana, and, in a way, the thought of coming back to a life-work in my
native State appealed to me. I always had a dim sort of feeling that
the people out in these parts knew more--had more sense and were less
artificial, I mean--and were kinder, and tried less to be somebody else,
than almost any other people anywhere. And I believe it's so. It's dull,
here in Carlow, of course--that is, it used to be. The agent explained
that I could make the paper a daily at once, with an enormous
circulation in the country. I was very, very young. Then I came here and
saw what I had got. Possibly it is because I am sensitive that I never
let Tom know. They expected me to amount to something; but I don't
believe his welcome would be less hearty to a failure--he is a good
heart.”

“Failure!” she cried, and clapped her hands and laughed.

“I'm really not very tragic about it, though I must seem consumed with
self-pity,” he returned, smiling. “It is only that I have dropped out of
the world while Tom is still in it.”

“Dropped out of the world!'” she echoed, impatiently. “Can't you see
you've dropped into it? That you----”

“Last night I was honored by your praise of my graceful mode of quitting
it!”

“And so you wish me to be consistent!” she retorted scornfully. “What
becomes of your gallantry when _we_ abide by reason?”

“True enough; equality is a denial of privilege.”

“And privilege is a denial of equality. I don't like that at all.”
 She turned a serious, suddenly illuminated face upon him and spoke
earnestly. “It's my hobby, I should tell you, and I'm very tired of that
nonsense about 'women always sounding the personal note.' It _should_
be sounded as we would sound it. And I think we could bear the loss of
'privilege'--”

He laughed and raised a protesting hand. “But _we_ couldn't.”

“No, you couldn't; it's the ribbon of superiority in your buttonhole.
I know several women who manage to live without men to open doors for
them, and I think I could bear to let a man pass before me now and then,
or wear his hat in an office where I happened to be; and I could get my
own ice at a dance, I think, possibly with even less fuss and scramble
than I've sometimes observed in the young men who have done it for me.
But you know you would never let us do things for ourselves, no matter
what legal equality might be declared, even when we get representation
for our taxation. You will never be able to deny yourselves giving
us our 'privilege.' I hate being waited on. I'd rather do things for
myself.”

She was so earnest in her satire, so full of scorn and so serious in
her meaning, and there was such a contrast between what she said and her
person; she looked so preeminently the pretty marquise, all silks and
softness, the little exquisite, so essentially to be waited on and
helped, to have cloaks thrown over the dampness for her to tread upon,
to be run about for--he could see half a dozen youths rushing about
for her ices, for her carriage, for her chaperone, for her wrap, at
dances--that to save his life he could not repress a chuckle. He managed
to make it inaudible, however; and it was as well that he did.

“I understand your love of newspaper work,” she went on, less
vehemently, but not less earnestly. “I have always wanted to do it
myself, wanted to immensely. I can't think of any more fascinating way
of earning one's living. And I know I could do it. Why don't you make
the 'Herald' a daily?”

To hear her speak of “earning one's living” was too much for him.
She gave the impression of riches, not only for the fine texture and
fashioning of her garments, but one felt that luxuries had wrapped
her from her birth. He had not had much time to wonder what she did in
Plattville; it had occurred to him that it was a little odd that she
could plan to spend any extent of time there, even if she had liked
Minnie Briscoe at school. He felt that she must have been sheltered and
petted and waited on all her life; one could not help yearning to wait
on her.

He answered inarticulately, “Oh, some day,” in reply to her question,
and then burst into outright laughter.

“I might have known you wouldn't take me seriously,” she said with no
indignation, only a sad wistfulness. “I am well used to it. I think it
is because I am not tall; people take big girls with more gravity. Big
people are nearly always listened to.”

“Listened to?” he said, and felt that he must throw himself on his knees
before her. “You oughtn't to mind being Titania. She was listened to,
you----”

She sprang to her feet and her eyes flashed. “Do you think personal
comment is ever in good taste?” she cried fiercely, and in his surprise
he almost fell off the bench. “If there is one thing I cannot bear,
it is to be told that I am '_small_' I am not! Every one who isn't a
giantess isn't '_small_'. I _hate_ personalities! I am a great deal over
five feet, a great deal more than that. I----”

“Please, _please_,” he said, “I didn't----”

“Don't say you are sorry,” she interrupted, and in spite of his
contrition he found her angry voice delicious, it was still so sweet,
hot with indignation, but ringing, not harsh. “Don't say you didn't mean
it; because you did! You can't unsay it, you cannot alter it! Ah!” She
drew in her breath with a sharp sigh, and covering her face with her
hands, sank back upon the bench. “I will not cry,” she said, not so
firmly as she thought she did.

“My blessed child!” he cried, in great distress and perturbation, “What
have I done? I--I----”

“Call me 'small' all you like!” she answered. “I don't care. It isn't
that. You mustn't think me such an imbecile.” She dropped her hands from
her face and shook the tears from her eyes with a mournful laugh. He saw
that her hands were clenched tightly and her lip trembled. “I will not
cry!” she said in a low voice.

“Somebody ought to murder me; I ought to have thought--personalities
_are_ hideous----”

“Don't! It wasn't that.”

“I ought to be shot----”

“Ah, please don't say that,” she said, shuddering; “please don't, not
even as a joke--after last night.”

“But I ought to be for hurting you, indeed----”

She laughed sadly, again. “It wasn't that. I don't care what you call
me. I am small. You'll try to forgive me for being such a baby? I didn't
mean anything I said. I haven't acted so badly since I was a child.”

“It's my fault, all of it. I've tired you out. And I let you get into
that crush at the circus--” he was going on, remorsefully.

“_That_!” she interrupted. “I don't think I would have missed the
circus.” He had a thrilling hope that she meant the tent-pole; she
looked as if she meant that, but he dared not let himself believe it.

“No,” he continued; “I have been so madly happy in being with you that
I've fairly worn out your patience. I've haunted you all day, and I
have----”

“All that has nothing to do with it,” she said, slowly. “Just after you
left, this afternoon, I found that I could not stay here. My people are
going abroad, to Dresden, at once, and I must go with them. That's what
almost made me cry. I leave to-morrow morning.”

He felt something strike at his heart. In the sudden sense of dearth
he had no astonishment that she should betray such agitation over
her departure from a place she had known so little, and friends who
certainly were not part of her life. He rose to his feet, and, resting
his arm against a sycamore, stood staring away from her at nothing.

She did not move. There was a long silence.

He had wakened suddenly; the skies had been sapphire, the sward emerald,
Plattville a Camelot of romance; to be there, enchantment--and now, like
a meteor burned out in a breath, the necromancy fell away and he gazed
into desolate years. The thought of the Square, his dusty office, the
bleak length of Main Street, as they should appear to-morrow, gave him
a faint physical sickness. To-day it had all been touched to beauty; he
had felt fit to live and work there a thousand years--a fool's dream,
and the waking was to emptiness. He should die now of hunger and thirst
in that Sahara; he hoped the Fates would let it be soon--but he knew
they would not; knew that this was hysteria, that in his endurance he
should plod on, plod, plod dustily on, through dingy, lonely years.

There was a rumble of thunder far out on the western prairie. A cold
breath stole through the hot stillness, and an arm of vapor reached out
between the moon and the quiet earth. Darkness fell. The man and the
girl kept silence between them. They might have been two sad guardians
of the black little stream that splashed unseen at their feet. Now and
then an echo of far away lightning faintly illumined them with a green
light. Thunder rolled nearer, ominously; the gods were driving their
chariots over the bridge. The chill breath passed, leaving the air again
to its hot inertia.

“I did not want to go,” she said, at last, with tears just below the
surface of her voice. “I wanted to stay here, but he--they wouldn't--I
can't.”

“Wanted to stay here?” he said, huskily, not turning. “Here?”

“Yes.”

“In Rouen, you mean?”

“In Plattville.”

“In Plattville?” He turned now, astounded.

“Yes; wouldn't you have taken me on the 'Herald'?” She rose and came
toward him. “I could have supported myself here if you would--and I've
studied how newspapers are made; I know I could have earned a wage. We
could have made it a daily.” He searched in vain for a trace of raillery
in her voice; there was none; she seemed to intend her words to be taken
literally.

“I don't understand,” he said. “I don't know what you mean.”

“I mean that I want to stay here; that I ought to stay here; that my
conscience tells me I should--but I can't and it makes me very unhappy.
That was why I acted so badly.”

“Your conscience!” he cried.

“Oh, I know what a jumble and puzzle it must seem to you.”

“I only know one thing; that you are going away to-morrow morning, and
that I shall never see you again.”

The darkness had grown heavy. They could not see each other; but a wan
glimmer gave him a fleeting, misty view of her; she stood half-turned
away from him, her hand to her cheek in the uncertain fashion of his
great moment of the afternoon; her eyes-he saw in the flying picture
that he caught--were adorably troubled and her hand trembled. She had
been irresistible in her gaiety; but now that a mysterious distress
assailed her, the reason for which he had no guess, she was so divinely
pathetic; and seemed such a rich and lovely and sad and happy thing to
have come into his life only to go out of it; and he was so full of
the prophetic sense of loss of her--it seemed so much like losing
everything--that he found too much to say to be able to say anything.

He tried to speak, and choked a little. A big drop of rain fell on his
bare head. Neither of them noticed the weather or cared for it. They
stood with the renewed blackness hanging like a thick drapery between
them.

“Can--can you--tell me why you think you ought not to go?” he whispered,
finally, with a great effort.

“No; not now. But I know you would think I am right in wanting to stay,”
 she cried, impulsively. “I know you would, if you knew about it--but I
can't, I can't. I must go in the morning.”

“I should always think you right,” he answered in an unsteady tone,
“Always!” He went over to the bench, fumbled about for his hat, and
picked it up.

“Come,” he said, gently, “I am going now.”

She stood quite motionless for a full minute or longer; then, without a
word, she moved toward the house. He went to her with hands extended to
find her, and his fingers touched her sleeve. Then together and silently
they found the garden-path; and followed its dim length. In the orchard
he touched her sleeve again and led the way.

As they came out behind the house she detained him. Stopping short, she
shook his hand from her arm. She spoke in a single breath, as if it were
all one word:

“Will you tell me why you go? It is not late. Why do you wish to leave
me, when I shall not see you again?”

“The Lord be good to me!” he broke out, all his long-pent passion of
dreams rushing to his lips, now that the barrier fell. “Don't you see
it is because I can't bear to let you go? I hoped to get away without
saying it. I want to be alone. I want to be with myself and try to
realize. I didn't want to make a babbling idiot of myself--but I am!
It is because I don't want another second of your sweetness to leave
an added pain when you've gone. It is because I don't want to hear your
voice again, to have it haunt me in the loneliness you will leave--but
it's useless, useless! I shall hear it always, just as I shall always
see your face, just as I have heard your voice and seen your face these
seven years--ever since I first saw you, a child at Winter Harbor. I
forgot for a while; I thought it was a girl I had made up out of my own
heart, but it was you--you always! The impression I thought nothing of
at the time, just the merest touch on my heart, light as it was, grew
and grew deeper until it was there forever. You've known me twenty-four
hours, and I understand what you think of me for speaking to you like
this. If I had known you for years and had waited and had the right to
speak and keep your respect, what have I to offer you? I, couldn't even
take care of you if you went mad as I and listened. I've no excuse for
this raving. Yes, I have!”

He saw her in another second of lightning, a sudden, bright one. Her
back was turned to him; she had taken a few startled steps from him.

“Ah,” he cried, “you are glad enough, now, to see me go! I knew it. I
wanted to spare myself that. I tried not to be a hysterical fool in your
eyes.” He turned aside and his head fell on his breast. “God help me,”
 he said, “what will this place be to me now?”

The breeze had risen; it gathered force; it was a chill wind, and there
rose a wailing on the prairie. Drops of rain began to fall.

“You will not think a question implied in this,” he said more
composedly, and with an unhappy laugh at himself. “I believe you will
not think me capable of asking you if you care----”

“No,” she answered; “I--I do not love you.”

“Ah! Was it a question, after all? I--you read me better than I do,
perhaps--but if I asked, I knew the answer.”

She made as if to speak again, but words refused her.

After a moment, “Good-by,” he said, very steadily. “I thank you for
the charity that has given me this little time with you--it will always
be--precious to me--I shall always be your servant.” His steadiness did
not carry him to the end of his sentence. “Good-by.”

She started toward him and stopped, without his seeing her. She answered
nothing; but stretched out her hand to him and then let it fall quickly.

“Good-by,” he said again. “I shall go out the orchard gate. Please tell
them good-night for me. Won't you speak to me? Good-by.”

He stood waiting while the rising wind blew their garments about them.
She leaned against the wall of the house. “Won't you say good-by and
tell me you can forget my----”

She did not speak.

“No!” he cried, wildly. “Since you don't forget it! I have spoiled
what might have been a pleasant memory for you, and I know it. You were
already troubled, and I have added, and you won't forget it, nor shall
I--nor shall I! Don't say good-by--I can say it for both of us. God
bless you--and good-by, good-by, good-by!”

He crushed his hat down over his eyes and ran toward the orchard gate.
For a moment lightning flashed repeatedly; she saw him go out the gate
and disappear into sudden darkness. He ran through the field and came
out on the road. Heaven and earth were revealed again for a dazzling
white second. From horizon to horizon rolled clouds contorted like
an illimitable field of inverted haystacks, and beneath them enormous
volumes of pale vapor were tumbling in the west, advancing eastward with
sinister swiftness. She ran to a little knoll at the corner of the house
and saw him set his face to the storm. She cried aloud to him with all
her strength and would have followed, but the wind took the words out of
her mouth and drove her back cowering to the shelter of the house.

Out on the road the dust came lashing and stinging him like a thousand
nettles; it smothered him, and beat upon him so that he covered his face
with his sleeve and fought into the storm shoulder foremost, dimly glad
of its rage, scarcely conscious of it, keeping westward on his way to
nowhere. West or east, south or north--it was all one to him. The few
heavy drops that fell boiling into the dust ceased to come; the rain
withheld while the wind-kings rode on earth. On he went in spite of
them. On and on, running blindly when he could run at all. At least, the
wind-kings were company. He had been so long alone. He could remember no
home that had ever been his since he was a little child, neither father
nor mother, no one who belonged to him or to whom he belonged, except
one cousin, an old man who was dead. For a day his dreams had found in a
girl's eyes the precious thing that is called home--oh, the wild fancy!
He laughed aloud.

There was a startling answer; a lance of living fire hurled from
the sky, riving the fields before his eyes, while crash on crash of
artillery numbed his ears. With that his common-sense awoke and he
looked about him. He was almost two miles from town; the nearest house
was the Briscoes' far down the road. He knew the rain would come now.
There was a big oak near him at the roadside. He stepped under its
sheltering branches and leaned against the great trunk, wiping the
perspiration and dust from his face. A moment of stunned quiet had
succeeded the peal of thunder. It was followed by several moments of
incessant lightning that played along the road and danced in the fields.
From that intolerable brightness he turned his head and saw, standing
against the fence, five feet away, a man, leaning over the top rail and
looking at him.



The same flash staggered brilliantly before Helen's eyes as she crouched
against the back steps of the brick house. It scarred a picture like a
marine of big waves: the tossing tops of the orchard trees; for in the
same second the full fury of the storm was loosed, wind and rain and
hail. It drove her against the kitchen door with cruel force; the latch
lifted, the door blew open violently, and she struggled to close it in
vain. The house seemed to rock. A lamp flickered toward her from the
inner doorway and was blown out.

“Helen! Helen!” came Minnie's voice, anxiously. “Is that you? We were
coming to look for you. Did you get wet?”

Mr. Willetts threw his weight against the door and managed to close it.
Then Minnie found her friend's hand and led her through the dark hall to
the parlor where the judge sat, placidly reading by a student-lamp.

Lige chuckled as they left the kitchen. “I guess you didn't try too hard
to shut that door, Harkless,” he said, and then, when they came into the
lighted room, “Why, where _is_ Harkless?” he asked. “Didn't he come with
us from the kitchen?”

“No,” answered Helen, faintly; “he's gone.” She sank upon the sofa and
drew her hand across her eyes as if to shade them from too sudden light.

“Gone!” The judge dropped his book and stared across the table at the
girl. “Gone! When?”

“Ten minutes--five--half an hour--I don't know. Before the storm
commenced.”

“Oh!” The old gentleman appeared to be reassured. “Probably he had work
to do and wanted to get in before the rain.”

But Lige Willetts was turning pale. He swallowed several times with
difficulty. “Which way did he go? He didn't come around the house; we
were out there till the storm broke.”

“He went by the orchard gate. When he got to the road he turned that
way.” She pointed to the west.

“He must have been crazy!” exclaimed the judge. “What possessed the
fellow?”

“I couldn't stop him. I didn't know how.” She looked at her three
companions, slowly and with growing terror, from one face to another.
Minnie's eyes were wide and she had unconsciously grasped Lige's arm;
the young man was looking straight before him; the judge got up and
walked nervously back and forth. Helen rose to her feet swiftly and went
toward the old man, her hands pressed to her bosom.

“Ah!” she cried out, sharply, “I had forgotten _that_! You don't think
they--you don't think----”

“I know what I think,” Lige broke in; “I think I'd ought to be hanged
for letting him out of my sight. Maybe it's all right; maybe he turned
and started right back for town--and got there. But I had no business
to leave him, and if I can I'll catch up with him yet.” He went to the
front door, and, opening it, let in a tornado of wind and flood of water
that beat him back; sheets of rain blew in horizontally, in spite of the
porch beyond.

Briscoe followed him. “Don't be a fool, Lige,” he said. “You hardly
expect to go out in that.” Lige shook his head; it needed them both
to get the door closed. The young man leaned against it and passed his
sleeve across his wet brow. “I hadn't ought to have left him.”

“Don't scare the girls,” whispered the other; then in a louder tone:
“All I'm afraid of is that he'll get blown to pieces or catch his death
of cold. That's all there is to worry about. Those scalawags wouldn't
try it again so soon after last night. I'm not bothering about that; not
at all. That needn't worry anybody.”

“But this morning----”

“Pshaw! He's likely home and dry by this time--all foolishness; don't be
an old woman.” The two men reentered the room and found Helen clinging
to Minnie's hand on the sofa. She looked up at them quickly.

“Do you think--do you--what do you--” Her voice shook so that she could
not go on.

The judge pinched her cheek and patted it. “I think he's home and dry,
but I think he got wet first; that's what I think. Never you fear, he's
a good hand at taking care of himself. Sit down, Lige. You can't go for
a while.” Nor could he. It was long before he could venture out; the
storm raged and roared without abatement; it was Carlow's worst since
'Fifty-one, the old gentleman said. They heard the great limbs crack and
break outside, while the thunder boomed and the wind ripped at the
eaves till it seemed the roof must go. Meanwhile the judge, after some
apology, lit his pipe and told long stories of the storms of early
days and of odd freaks of the wind. He talked on calmly, the picture of
repose, and blew rings above his head, but Helen saw that one of his
big slippers beat an unceasing little tattoo on the carpet. She sat with
fixed eyes, in silence, holding Minnie's hand tightly; and her face was
colorless, and grew whiter as the slow hours dragged by.

Every moment Mr. Willetts became more restless, though assuring the
ladies he had no anxiety regarding Mr. Harkless; it was only his own
dereliction of duty that he regretted; the boys would have the laugh
on him, he said. But he visibly chafed more and more under the judge's
stories; and constantly rose to peer out of the window into the wrack
and turmoil, or uneasily shifted in his chair. Once or twice he struck
his hands together with muttered ejaculations. At last there was a lull
in the fury without, and, as soon as it was perceptible, he declared his
intention of making his way into town; he had ought to have went before,
he declared, apprehensively; and then, with immediate amendment, of
course he would find the editor at work in the “Herald” office; there
wasn't the slightest doubt of that; he agreed with the judge, but he
better see about it. He would return early in the morning to bid Miss
Sherwood good-by; hoped she'd come back, some day; hoped it wasn't her
last visit to Plattville. They gave him an umbrella and he plunged out
into the night, and as they stood watching him for a moment from the
door, the old man calling after him cheery good-nights and laughing
messages to Harkless, they could hear his feet slosh into the puddles
and see him fight with his umbrella when he got out into the road.

Helen's room was over the porch, the windows facing north, looking out
upon the pike and across the fields beyond. “Please don't light the
lamp, Minnie,” she said, when they had gone upstairs. “I don't need a
light.” Miss Briscoe was flitting about the room, hunting for matches.
In the darkness she came to her friend, and laid a kind, large hand on
Helen's eyes, and the hand became wet. She drew Helen's head down on her
shoulder and sat beside her on the bed.

“Sweetheart, you mustn't fret,” she soothed, in motherly fashion.
“Don't you worry, dear. He's all right. It isn't your fault, dear. They
wouldn't come on a night like this.”

But Helen drew away and went to the window, flattening her arm against
the pane, her forehead pressed against her arm. She had let him go; she
had let him go alone. She had forgotten the danger that always beset
him. She had been so crazy, she had seen nothing, thought of nothing.
She had let him go into that, and into the storm, alone. Who knew better
than she how cruel they were? She had seen the fire leap from the white
blossom and heard the ball whistle, the ball they had meant for his
heart, that good, great heart. She had run to him the night before--why
had she let him go into the unknown and the storm to-night? But how
could she have stopped him? How could she have kept him, after what he
had said? She peered into the night through distorting tears.

The wind had gone down a little, but only a little, and the electrical
flashes danced all around the horizon in magnificent display, sometimes
far away, sometimes dazingly near, the darkness trebly deep between the
intervals when the long sweep of flat lands lay in dazzling clearness,
clean-cut in the washed air to the finest detail of stricken field and
heaving woodland. A staggering flame clove earth and sky; sheets of
light came following it, and a frightful uproar shook the house and
rattled the casements, but over the crash of thunder Minnie heard her
friend's loud scream and saw her spring back from the window with both
hands, palm outward, pressed to her face. She leaped to her and threw
her arms about her.

“What is it?”

“Look!” Helen dragged her to the window. “At the next flash--the fence
beyond the meadow----”

“What was it? What was it like?” The lightning flashed incessantly.
Helen tried to point; her hand only jerked from side to side.

“_Look_!” she cried.

“I see nothing but the lightning,” Minnie answered, breathlessly.

“Oh, the _fence_! The fence--and in the field!”

“_Helen_! What was it _like_?”

“Ah-ah!” she panted, “a long line of white--horrible white----”

“What _like_?” Minnie turned from the window and caught the other's
wrist in a fluttering clasp.

“Minnie, Minnie! Like long white gowns and cowls crossing the fence.”
 Helen released her wrist, and put both hands on Minnie's cheeks, forcing
her around to face the pane. “You must look--you must look,” she cried.

“They wouldn't do it, they wouldn't--it _isn't_!” Minnie cried. “They
couldn't come in the storm. They wouldn't do it in the pouring rain!”

“Yes! Such things would mind the rain!” She burst into hysterical
laughter, and Minnie, almost as unnerved, caught her about the waist.
“They would mind the rain. They would fear a storm! Ha, ha, ha!
Yes--yes! And I let him go--I let him go!”

Pressing close together, shuddering, clasping each other's waists, the
two girls peered out at the flickering landscape.

“_Look_!”

Up from the distant fence that bordered the northern side of Jones's
field, a pale, pelted, flapping thing reared itself, poised, and seemed,
just as the blackness came again, to drop to the ground.

“Did you _see_?”

But Minnie had thrown herself into a chair with a laugh of wild relief.
“My darling girl!” she cried. “Not a line of white things--just one--Mr.
Jones's old scarecrow! And we saw it blown down!”

“No, no, no! I saw the others; they were in the field beyond. I saw
them! When I looked the first time they were nearly all on the fence.
This time we saw the last man crossing. Ah! I let him go alone!”

Minnie sprang up and enfolded her. “No; you dear, imagining child,
you're upset and nervous--that's all the matter in the world. Don't
worry; don't, child, it's all right. Mr. Harkless is home and safe in
bed long ago. I know that old scarecrow on the fence like a book; you're
so unstrung you fancied the rest. He's all right; don't you bother,
dear.”

The big, motherly girl took her companion in her arms and rocked her
back and forth soothingly, and petted and reassured her, and then cried
a little with her, as a good-hearted girl always will with a friend.
Then she left her for the night with many a cheering word and tender
caress. “Get to sleep, dear,” she called through the door when she had
closed it behind her. “You must, if you have to go in the morning--it
just breaks my heart. I don't know how we'll bear it without you. Father
will miss you almost as much as I will. Good-night. Don't bother
about that old white scarecrow. That's all it was. Good-night, dear,
good-night.”

“Good-night, dear,” answered a plaintive little voice. Helen's hot cheek
pressed the pillow and tossed from side to side. By and by she turned
the pillow over; it had grown wet. The wind blew about the eaves and
blew itself out; she hardly heard it. Sleep would not come. She got
up and laved her burning eyes. Then she sat by the window. The storm's
strength was spent at last; the rain grew lighter and lighter, until
there was but the sound of running water and the drip, drip on the tin
roof of the porch. Only the thunder rumbling in the distance marked the
storm's course; the chariots of the gods rolling further and further
away, till they finally ceased to be heard altogether. The clouds parted
majestically, and then, between great curtains of mist, the day-star was
seen shining in the east.

The night was hushed, and the peace that falls before dawn was upon
the wet, flat lands. Somewhere in the sodden grass a swamped cricket
chirped. From an outlying flange of the village a dog's howl rose
mournfully; was answered by another, far away, and by another and
another. The sonorous chorus rose above the village, died away, and
quiet fell again.

Helen sat by the window, no comfort touching her heart. Tears coursed
her cheeks no longer, but her eyes were wide and staring, and her lips
parted, for the hush was broken by the far clamor of the court-house
bell ringing in the night. It rang, and rang, and rang, and rang. She
could not breathe. She threw open the window. The bell stopped. All was
quiet once more. The east was growing gray.

Suddenly out of the stillness there came the sound of a horse galloping
over a wet road. He was coming like mad. Some one for a doctor? No;
the horse-hoofs grew louder, coming out from the town, coming this
way, coming faster and faster, coming _here_. There was a splashing and
trampling in front of the house and a sharp “Whoa!” In the dim gray of
first dawn she made out a man on a foam-flecked horse. He drew up at the
gate.

A window to the right of hers went screeching up. She heard the judge
clear his throat before he spoke.

“What is it? That's you, isn't it, Wiley? What is it?” He took a good
deal of time and coughed between the sentences. His voice was more than
ordinarily quiet, and it sounded husky. “What is it, Wiley?”

“Judge, what time did Mr. Harkless leave here last night and which way
did he go?”

There was a silence. The judge turned away from the window. Minnie was
standing just outside his door. “It must have been about half-past nine,
wasn't it, father?” she called in a shaking voice. “And, you know, Helen
thought he went west.”

“Wiley!” The old man leaned from the sill again.

“Yes!” answered the man on horseback.

“Wiley, he left about half-past nine--just before the storm. They think
he went west.”

“Much obliged. Willetts is so upset he isn't sure of anything.”


“Wiley!” The old man's voice shook; Minnie began to cry aloud. The
horseman wheeled about and turned his animal's head toward town.
“Wiley!”

“Yes.”

“Wiley, they haven't--you don't think they've got him?”

“By God, judge,” said the man on horseback, “I'm afraid they have!”




CHAPTER X. THE COURT-HOUSE BELL

The court-house bell ringing in the night! No hesitating stroke of
Schofields' Henry, no uncertain touch, was on the rope. A loud, wild,
hurried clamor pealing out to wake the country-side, a rapid _clang!
clang! clang!_ that struck clear in to the spine.

The court-house bell had tolled for the death of Morton, of Garfield, of
Hendricks; had rung joy-peals of peace after the war and after political
campaigns; but it had rung as it was ringing now only three times; once
when Hibbard's mill burned, once when Webb Landis killed Sep Bardlock
and intrenched himself in the lumber-yard and would not be taken till he
was shot through and through, and once when the Rouen accommodation was
wrecked within twenty yards of the station.

Why was the bell ringing now? Men and women, startled into wide
wakefulness, groped to windows--no red mist hung over town or country.
What was it? The bell rang on. Its loud alarm beat increasingly into
men's hearts and quickened their throbbing to the rapid measure of
its own. Vague forms loomed in the gloaming. A horse, wildly ridden,
splashed through the town. There were shouts; voices called hoarsely.
Lamps began to gleam in the windows. Half-clad people emerged from their
houses, men slapping their braces on their shoulders as they ran out of
doors. Questions were shouted into the dimness.

Then the news went over the town.

It was cried from yard to yard, from group to group, from gate to gate,
and reached the furthermost confines. Runners shouted it as they sped
by; boys panted it, breathless; women with loosened hair stumbled into
darkling chambers and faltered it out to new-wakened sleepers; pale
girls clutching wraps at their throats whispered it across fences; the
sick, tossing on their hard beds, heard it. The bell clamored it far and
near; it spread over the country-side; it flew over the wires to distant
cities. The White-Caps had got Mr. Harkless!

Lige Willetts had lost track of him out near Briscoes', it was said, and
had come in at midnight seeking him. He had found Parker, the “Herald”
 foreman, and Ross Schofield, the typesetter, and Bud Tipworthy, the
devil, at work in the printing-room, but no sign of Harkless, there or
in the cottage. Together these had sought for him and had roused others,
who had inquired at every house where he might have gone for shelter,
and they had heard nothing. They had watched for his coming during the
slackening of the storm and he had not come, and there was nowhere he
could have gone. He was missing; only one thing could have happened.

They had roused up Warren Smith, the prosecutor, the missing editor's
most intimate friend in Carlow, and Homer, the sheriff, and Jared Wiley,
the deputy. William Todd had rung the alarm. The first thing to do was
to find him. After that there would be trouble--if not before. It looked
as if there would be trouble before. The men tramping up to the muddy
Square in their shirt-sleeves were bulgy about the right hips; and when
Homer Tibbs joined Lum Landis at the hotel corner, and Landis saw that
Homer was carrying a shot-gun, Landis went back for his. A hastily sworn
posse galloped out Main Street. Women and children ran into neighbors'
yards and began to cry. Day was coming; and, as the light grew, men
swore and savagely kicked at the palings of fences that they passed.

In the foreglow of dawn they gathered in the Square and listened to
Warren Smith, who made a speech from the court-house fence and warned
them to go slow. They answered him with angry shouts and hootings, but
he made his big voice heard, and bade them do nothing rash; no facts
were known, he said; it was far from certain that harm had been done,
and no one knew that the Six-Cross-Roads people had done it--even if
something had happened to Mr. Harkless. He declared that he spoke in
Harkless's name. Nothing could distress _him_ so much as for them to
defy the law, to take it out of the proper hands. Justice would be done.

“Yes it will!” shouted a man below him, brandishing the butt of a
raw-hide whip above his head. “And while you jaw on about it here, he
may be tied up like a dog in the woods, shot full of holes by the men
you never lifted a finger to hender, because you want their votes when
you run for circuit judge. What are we doin' _here_? What's the good of
listening to you?”

There was a yell at this, and those who heard the speaker would probably
have started for the Cross-Roads without further parley, had not a rumor
sprung up, which passed so rapidly from man to man that within five
minutes it was being turbulently discussed in every portion of the
crowd. The news came that the two shell-gamblers had wrenched a bar
out of a window under cover of the storm, had broken jail, and were
at large. Their threats of the day before were remembered now, with
convincing vividness. They had sworn repeatedly to Bardlock and to the
sheriff, and in the hearing of others, that they would “do” for the man
who took their money from them and had them arrested. The prosecuting
attorney, quickly perceiving the value of this complication in holding
back the mob that was already forming, called Homer from the crowd
and made him get up on the fence and confess that his prisoners had
escaped--at what time he did not know, probably toward the beginning of
the storm, when it was noisiest.

“You see,” cried the attorney, “there is nothing as yet of which we can
accuse the Cross-Roads. If our friend has been hurt, it is much more
likely that these crooks did it. They escaped in time to do it, and
we all know they were laying for him. You want to be mighty careful,
fellow-citizens. Homer is already in telegraphic communication with
every town around here, and we'll have those men before night. All
you've got to do is to control yourselves a little and go home quietly.”
 He could see that his words (except those in reference to returning
home--no one was going home) made an impression. There rose a babble of
shouting and argument and swearing that grew continually louder, and
the faces the lawyer looked down on were creased with perplexity, and
shadowed with an anger that settled darker and darker.

Mr. Ephraim Watts, in spite of all confusion, clad as carefully as
upon the preceding day, deliberately climbed the fence and stood by the
lawyer and made a single steady gesture with his hand. He was listened
to at once, as his respect for the law was less notorious than his
irreverence for it, and he had been known in Carlow as a customarily
reckless man. They wanted illegal and desperate advice, and quieted down
to hear it. He spoke in his professionally calm voice.

“Gentlemen, it seems to me that Mr. Smith and Mr. Ribshaw” (nodding to
the man with the rawhide whip) “are both right. What good are we doing
here? What we want to know is what's happened to Mr. Harkless. It looks
just now like the shell-men might have done it. Let's find out what they
done. Scatter and hunt for him. 'Soon as anything is known for certain,
Hibbard's mill whistle will blow three times. Keep on looking till it
does. _Then_” he finished, with a barely perceptible scornful smile at
the attorney, “_then_ we can decide on what had ought to be done.”

Six-Cross-Roads lay dark and steaming in the sun that morning. The forge
was silent, the saloon locked up, the roadway deserted, even by the
pigs. The broken old buggy stood rotting in the mud without a
single lean, little old man or woman--such were the children of
the Cross-Roads--to play about it. The fields were empty, and the
rag-stuffed windows blank, under the baleful glance of the horsemen
who galloped by at intervals, muttering curses, not always confining
themselves to muttering them. Once, when the deputy sheriff rode
through alone, a tattered black hound, more wolf than dog, half-emerged,
growling, from beneath one of the tumble-down barns, and was jerked back
into the darkness by his tail, with a snarl fiercer than his own, while
a gun-barrel shone for a second as it swung for a stroke on the brute's
head. The hound did not yelp or whine when the blow fell. He shut his
eyes twice, and slunk sullenly back to his place.

The shanties might have received a volley or two from some of the
mounted bands, exasperated by futile searching, had not the escape of
Homer's prisoners made the guilt of the Cross-Roads appear doubtful in
the minds of many. As the morning waned, the advocates of the theory
that the gamblers had made away with Harkless grew in number. There came
a telegram from the Rouen chief of police that he had a clew to their
whereabouts; he thought they had succeeded in reaching Rouen, and it
began to be generally believed that they had escaped by the one-o'clock
freight, which had stopped to take on some empty cars at a side-track
a mile northwest of the town, across the fields from the Briscoe house.
Toward noon a party went out to examine the railroad embankment.

Men began to come back into the village for breakfast by twos and
threes, though many kept on searching the woods, not feeling the need of
food, or caring if they did. Every grove and clump of underbrush, every
thicket, was ransacked; the waters of the creek, shallow for the most
part, but swollen overnight, were dragged at every pool. Nothing was
found; there was not a sign.

The bar of the hotel was thronged all morning as the returning citizens
rapidly made their way thither, and those who had breakfasted and were
going out again paused for internal, as well as external, reinforcement.
The landlord, himself returned from a long hunt, set up his whiskey with
a lavish hand.

“He was the best man we had, boys,” said Landis, as he poured the
little glasses full. “We'd ort of sent him to the legislative halls of
Washington long ago. He'd of done us honor there; but we never thought
of doin' anything fer him; jest set 'round and let him build up the
town and give him empty thankyes. Drink hearty, gentlemen,” he finished,
gloomily, “I don't grudge no liquor to-day--except to Lige Willetts.”

“He was a good man,” said young William Todd, whose nose was red, not
from the whiskey. “I've about give up.”

Schofields' Henry drew his sleeve across his eyes. “He was the only man
in this whole city that didn't jab and nag at me when I done my best,”
 he exclaimed, with an increasing break in his utterance. “Many a good
word I've had from him when nobody in town done nothin' but laugh an'
rile an' badger me about my--my bell.” And Schofields' Henry began to
cry openly.

“He was a great hand with the chuldern,” said one man. “Always have
something to say to 'em to make 'em laugh when he went by. 'Talk more to
them 'n he would to grown folks. Yes, sir.”

“They knowed _him_ all right,” added another. “I reckon all of us did,
little and big.”

“It's goin' to seem mighty empty around here,” said Ross Schofield.
“What's goin' to become o' the 'Herald' and the party in this district?
Where's the man to run either of 'em now. Like as not,” he concluded
desperately, “the election'll go against us in the fall.”

Dibb Zane choked over his four fingers. “We might's well bust up this
dab-dusted ole town ef he's gone.”

“I don't know what's come over that Cynthy Tipworthy,” said the
landlord. “She's waited table on him last two year, and her brother Bud
works at the 'Herald' office. She didn't say a word--only looked
and looked and looked--like a crazy woman; then her and Bud went off
together to hunt in the woods. They just tuck hold of each other's hands
like----”

“That ain't nothin',” Homer Tibbs broke in. “You'd ort to've saw old Miz
Hathaway, that widder woman next door to us, when she heard it. He had
helped her to git her pension; and she tuck on worse 'n' anything I ever
hear--lot worse 'n' when Hathaway died.”

“I reckon there ain't many crazier than them two Bowlders, father and
son,” said the postmaster, wiping the drops from his beard as he set his
glass on the bar. “They rid into town like a couple of wild Indians, the
old man beatin' that gray mare o' theirn till she was one big welt, and
he ain't natcherly no cruel man, either. I reckon Lige Willetts better
keep out of Hartley's way.”

“I keep out of no man's way,” cried a voice behind him. Turning, they
saw Lige standing on the threshold of the door that led to the street.
In his hand he held the bridle of the horse he had ridden across the
sidewalk, and that now stood panting, with lowered head, half through
the doorway, beside his master. Lige was hatless, splashed with mud
from head to foot; his jaw was set, his teeth ground together; his eyes
burned under red lids, and his hair lay tossed and damp on his brow. “I
keep out of no man's way,” he repeated, hoarsely.

“I heard you, Mr. Tibbs, but I've got too much to do, while you loaf
and gas and drink over Lum Landis's bar--I've got other business than
keeping out of Hartley Bowlder's way. I'm looking for John Harkless. He
was the best man we had in this ornery hole, and he was too good for us,
and so we've maybe let him get killed, and maybe I'm to blame. But I'm
going to find him, and if he's hurt--damn _me_! I'm going to have a hand
on the rope that lifts the men that did it, if I have to go to Rouen to
put it there! After that I'll answer for my fault, not before!”

He threw himself on his horse and was gone. Soon the room was emptied,
as the patrons of the bar returned to the search, and only Mr. Wilkerson
and the landlord remained, the bar being the professional office, so to
speak, of both.

Wilkerson had a chair in a corner, where he sat chanting a funeral march
in a sepulchral murmur, allowing a parenthetical _hic_ to punctuate the
dirge in place of the drum. Whenever a batch of newcomers entered,
he rose to drink with them; and, at such times, after pouring off his
liquor with a rich melancholy, shedding tears after every swallow, he
would make an exploring tour of the room on his way back to his corner,
stopping to look under each chair inquiringly and ejaculate: “Why, where
kin he be!” Then, shaking his head, he would observe sadly: “Fine
young man, he was, too; fine young man. Pore fellow! I reckon we hain't
a-goin' to git him.”

At eleven o'clock. Judge Briscoe dropped wearily from his horse at his
own gate, and said to a wan girl who came running down the walk to meet
him: “There is nothing, yet. I sent the telegram to your mother--to Mrs.
Sherwood.”

Helen turned away without answering. Her face was very white and looked
pinched about the mouth. She went back to where old Fisbee sat on the
porch, his white head held between his two hands; he was rocking himself
to and fro. She touched him gently, but he did not look up. She spoke to
him.

“There isn't anything--yet. He sent the telegram to mamma. I shall stay
with you, now, no matter what you say.” She sat beside him and put her
head down on his shoulder, and though for a moment he appeared not to
notice it, when Minnie came out on the porch, hearing her father at the
door, the old scholar had put his arm about the girl and was stroking
her fair hair softly.

Briscoe glanced at them, and raised a warning finger to his daughter,
and they went tiptoeing into the house, where the judge dropped heavily
upon a sofa with an asthmatic sigh; he was worn and tired. Minnie stood
before him with a look of pale inquiry, and he shook his head.

“No use to tell _them_; but I can't see any hope,” he answered her,
biting nervously at the end of a cigar. “I expect you better bring me
some coffee in here; I couldn't take another step to save me. I'm too
old to tear around the country horseback before breakfast, like I have
to-day.”

“Did you send her telegram?” Minnie asked, as he drank the coffee she
brought him. She had interpreted “coffee” liberally, and, with the
assistance of Mildy Upton (whose subdued nose was frankly red and who
shed tears on the raspberries), had prepared an appetizing table at his
elbow.

“Yes,” responded the judge, “and I'm glad she sent it. I talked
the other way yesterday, what little I said--it isn't any of our
business--but I don't think any too much of those people, somehow. She
thinks she belongs with Fisbee, and I guess she's right. That young
fellow must have got along with her pretty well, and I'm afraid when
she gives up she'll be pretty bad over it; but I guess we all will. It's
terribly sudden, somehow, though it's only what everybody half expected
would come; only we thought it would come from over yonder.” He nodded
toward the west. “But she's got to stay here with us. Boarding at Sol
Tibbs's with that old man won't do; and she's no girl to live in two
rooms. You fix it up with her--you make her stay.”

“She must,” answered his daughter as she knelt beside him and patted his
coat and handed him several things to eat at the same time. “Mr. Fisbee
will help me persuade her, now that she's bound to stay in spite of him
and the Sherwoods, too. I think she is perfectly grand to do it. I've
always thought she was grand--ever since she took me under her wing
at school when I was terribly 'country' and frightened; but she was so
sweet and kind she made me forget. She was the pet of the school, too,
always doing things for the other girls, for everybody; looking out for
people simply heads and heads bigger than herself, and so
recklessly generous and so funny about it; and always thoughtful
and--and--pleasant----”

Minnie was speaking sadly, mechanically; but suddenly she broke off with
a quick sob, sprang up and went to the window; then, turning, cried out:

“I don't believe it! He knew how to take care of himself too well. He'd
have got away from them.”

Her father shook his head. “Then why hasn't he turned up? He'd have gone
home after the storm if something bad wasn't the matter.”

“But nothing--nothing _that_ bad could have happened. They haven't
found--any--anything.”

“But why hasn't he come back, child?”

“Well, he's lying hurt somewhere, that's all.”

“Then why haven't they found him?”

“I don't care!” she cried, and choked with the words and tossed her
dishevelled hair from her temples; “it isn't true. Helen won't believe
it--why should I? It's only a few hours since he was right here in our
yard, talking to us all. I won't believe it till they've searched every
stick and stone of Six-Cross-Roads and found him.”

“It wasn't the Cross-Roads,” said the old gentleman, pushing the table
away and relaxing his limbs on the sofa. “They probably didn't have
anything to do with it. We thought they had at first, but everybody's
about come to believe it was those two devils that he had arrested
yesterday.”

“Not the Cross-Roads!” echoed Minnie, and she began to tremble
violently. “Haven't they been out there yet?”

“What use? They are out of it, and they can thank God they are!”

“They are not!” she cried excitedly. “They did it. It was the
White-Caps. We saw them, Helen and I.”

The judge got upon his feet with an oath. He had not sworn for years
until that morning. “What's this?” he said sharply.

“I ought to have told you before, but we were so frightened, and--and
you went off in such a rush after Mr. Wiley was here. I never dreamed
everybody wouldn't know it was the Cross-Roads; that they would _think_
of any one else. And I looked for the scarecrow as soon as it was light
and it was 'way off from where we saw them, and wasn't blown down at
all, and Helen saw them in the field besides--saw all of them----”

He interrupted her. “What do you mean? Try to tell me about it quietly,
child.” He laid his hand on her shoulder.

She told him breathlessly (while he grew more and more visibly perturbed
and uneasy, biting his cigar to pieces and groaning at intervals) what
she and Helen had seen in the storm. When she finished he took a few
quick turns about the room with his hands thrust deep in his coat
pockets, and then, charging her to repeat the story to no one, left the
house, and, forgetting his fatigue, rapidly crossed the fields to the
point where the bizarre figures of the night had shown themselves to the
two girls at the window.

The soft ground had been trampled by many feet. The boot-prints pointed
to the northeast. He traced them backward to the southwest through the
field, and saw where they had come from near the road, going northeast.
Then, returning, he climbed the fence and followed them northward
through the next field. From there, the next, beyond the road that was
a continuation of Main Street, stretched to the railroad embankment.
The track, raggedly defined in trampled loam and muddy furrow, bent in
a direction which indicated that its terminus might be the switch
where the empty cars had stood last night, waiting for the one-o'clock
freight. Though the fields had been trampled down in many places by
the searching parties, he felt sure of the direction taken by the
Cross-Roads men, and he perceived that the searchers had mistaken the
tracks he followed for those of earlier parties in the hunt. On the
embankment he saw a number of men, walking west and examining the ground
on each side, and a long line of people following them out from town. He
stopped. He held the fate of Six-Cross-Roads in his hand and he knew it.

He knew that if he spoke, his evidence would damn the Cross-Roads,
and that it meant that more than the White-Caps would be hurt, for the
Cross-Roads would fight. If he had believed that the dissemination of
his knowledge could have helped Harkless, he would have called to the
men near him at once; but he had no hope that the young man was alive.
They would not have dragged him out to their shanties wounded, or as
a prisoner; such a proceeding would have courted detection, and, also,
they were not that kind; they had been “looking for him” a long time,
and their one idea was to kill him.

And Harkless, for all his gentleness, was the sort of man, Briscoe
believed, who would have to be killed before he could be touched. Of one
thing the old gentleman was sure; the editor had not been tied up and
whipped while yet alive. In spite of his easy manners and geniality,
there was a dignity in him that would have made him kill and be killed
before the dirty fingers of a Cross-Roads “White-Cap” could have been
laid upon him in chastisement. A great many good Americans of Carlow who
knew him well always Mistered him as they would have Mistered only an
untitled Morton or Hendricks who might have lived amongst them. He
was the only man the old darky, Uncle Xenophon, had ever addressed as
“Marse” since he came to Plattville, thirty years ago.

Briscoe considered it probable that a few people were wearing bandages,
in the closed shanties over to the west to-day. A thought of the number
they had brought against one man; a picture of the unequal struggle, of
the young fellow he had liked so well, unarmed and fighting hopelessly
in a trap, and a sense of the cruelty of it, made the hot anger surge
up in his breast, and he started on again. Then he stopped once more.
Though long retired from faithful service on the bench, he had been all
his life a serious exponent of the law, and what he went to tell meant
lawlessness that no one could hope to check. He knew the temper of the
people; their long suffering was at an end, and they would go over at
last and wipe out the Cross-Roads. It depended on him. If the mob could
be held off over to-day, if men's minds could cool over night, the
law could strike and the innocent and the hotheaded be spared from
suffering. He would wait; he would lay his information before the
sheriff; and Horner would go quietly with a strong posse, for he would
need a strong one. He began to retrace his steps.

The men on the embankment were walking slowly, bending far over, their
eyes fixed on the ground. Suddenly one of them stood erect and tossed
his arms in the air and shouted loudly. Other men ran to him, and
another far down the track repeated the shout and the gesture to another
far in his rear; this man took it up, and shouted and waved to a fourth
man, and so they passed the signal back to town. There came, almost
immediately three long, loud whistles from a mill near the station, and
the embankment grew black with people pouring out from town, while the
searchers came running from the fields and woods and underbrush on both
sides of the railway.

Briscoe paused for the last time; then he began to walk slowly toward
the embankment.

The track lay level and straight, not dimming in the middle distances,
the rails converging to points, both northwest and southeast, in
the clean-washed air, like examples of perspective in a child's
drawing-book. About seventy miles to the west and north lay Rouen; and,
in the same direction, nearly six miles from where the signal was
given, the track was crossed by a road leading directly south to
Six-Cross-Roads.

The embankment had been newly ballasted with sand. What had been
discovered was a broad brown stain on the south slope near the top.
There were smaller stains above and below; none beyond it to left or
right; and there were deep boot-prints in the sand. Men were examining
the place excitedly, talking and gesticulating. It was Lige Willetts who
had found it. His horse was tethered to a fence near by, at the end of
a lane through a cornfield. Jared Wiley, the deputy, was talking to a
group near the stain, explaining.

“You see them two must have knowed about the one-o'clock freight, and
that it was to stop here to take on the empty lumber cars. I don't know
how they knowed it, but they did. It was this way: when they dropped
from the window, they beat through the storm, straight for this
side-track. At the same time Mr. Harkless leaves Briscoes' goin'
west. It begins to rain. He cuts across to the railroad to have a sure
footing, and strikin' for the deepo for shelter--near place as any
except Briscoes' where he'd said good-night already and prob'ly don't
wish to go back, 'fear of givin' trouble or keepin' 'em up--anybody can
understand that. He comes along, and gets to where we are precisely at
the time _they_ do, them comin' from town, him strikin' for it. They run
right into each other. That's what happened. They re-_cog_-nized him and
raised up on him and let him have it. What they done it with, I don't
know; we took everything in that line off of 'em; prob'ly used railroad
iron; and what they done with him afterwards we don't know; but we will
by night. They'll sweat it out of 'em up at Rouen when they get 'em.”

“I reckon maybe some of us might help,” remarked Mr. Watts,
reflectively.

Jim Bardlock swore a violent oath. “That's the talk!” he shouted. “Ef I
ain't the first man of this crowd to set my foot in Roowun, an' first to
beat in that jail door, an' take 'em out an' hang 'em by the neck till
they're dead, dead, dead, I'm not Town Marshal of Plattville, County of
Carlow, State of Indiana, and the Lord have mercy on our souls!”

Tom Martin looked at the brown stain and quickly turned away; then he
went back slowly to the village. On the way he passed Warren Smith.

“Is it so?” asked the lawyer.

Martin answered with a dry throat. He looked out dimly over the sunlit
fields, and swallowed once or twice. “Yes, it's so. There's a good deal
of it there. Little more than a boy he was.” The old fellow passed his
seamy hand over his eyes without concealment. “Peter ain't very bright,
sometimes, it seems to me,” he added, brokenly; “overlook Bodeffer and
Fisbee and me and all of us old husks, and--and--” he gulped suddenly,
then finished--“and act the fool and take a boy that's the best we had.
I wish the Almighty would take Peter off the gate; he ain't fit fer it.”

When the attorney reached the spot where the crowd was thickest, way
was made for him. The old colored man, Xenophon, approached at the
same time, leaning on a hickory stick and bent very far over, one hand
resting on his hip as if to ease a rusty joint. The negro's age was
an incentive to fable; from his appearance he might have known the
prophets, and he wore that hoary look of unearthly wisdom many decades
of superstitious experience sometimes give to members of his race.
His face, so tortured with wrinkles that it might have been made of
innumerable black threads woven together, was a living mask of the
mystery of his blood. Harkless had once said that Uncle Xenophon had
visited heaven before Swedenborg and hell before Dante. To-day, as he
slowly limped over the ties, his eyes were bright and dry under the
solemn lids, and, though his heavy nostrils were unusually distended in
the effort for regular breathing, the deeply puckered lips beneath them
were set firmly.

He stopped and looked at the faces before him. When he spoke his voice
was gentle, and though the tremulousness of age harped on the vocal
strings, it was rigidly controlled. “Kin some kine gelmun,” he asked,
“please t'be so good ez t' show de ole main whuh de W'ite-Caips is done
shoot Marse Hawkliss?”

“Here was where it happened, Uncle Zen,” answered Wiley, leaning him
forward. “Here is the stain.”

Xenophon bent over the spot on the sand, making little odd noises in his
throat. Then he painfully resumed his former position. “Dass his blood,”
 he said, in the same gentle, quavering tone. “Dass my bes' frien' whut
lay on de groun' whuh yo staind, gelmun.”

There was a pause, and no one spoke.

“Dass whuh day laid 'im an' dass whuh he lie,” the old negro continued.
“Dey shot 'im in de fiels. Dey ain' shot 'im hear-yondeh dey drugged
'im, but dis whuh he lie.” He bent over again, then knelt, groaningly,
and placed his hand on the stain, one would have said, as a man might
place his hand over a heart to see if it still beat. He was motionless,
with the air of hearkening.

“Marse, honey, is you gone?” He raised his voice as if calling, “Is you
gone, suh?--Marse?”

He looked up at the circle about him, and, still kneeling, not taking
his hand from the sand, seeming to wait for a sign, to listen for a
voice, he said: “Whafo' you gelmun think de good Lawd summon Marse
Hawkliss? Kaze he de mos' fittes'? You know dat man he ketch me in de
cole night, wintuh 'to' lais', stealin' 'is wood. You know whut he done
t'de ole thief? Tek an' bull' up big fiah een ole Zen' shainty; say,
'He'p yo'se'f an' welcome. Reckon you hongry, too, ain' you, Xenophon?'
Tek an' feed me. Tek an' tek keer o' me ev' since. Ah pump de baith full
in de mawin'; mek 'is bed; pull de weeds out'n of de front walk--dass
all. He tek me in. When Ah aisk 'im ain' he fraid keep ole thief he say,
jesso: 'Dass all my fault, Xenophon; ought look you up long 'go; ought
know long 'go you be cole dese baid nights. Reckon Ahm de thievenest one
us two, Xenophon, keepin' all dis wood stock' up when you got none,' he
say, jesso. Tek me in; say he _lahk_ a thief. Pay me sala'y. Feed me.
Dass de main whut de Caips gone shot lais' night.” He raised his head
sharply, and the mystery in his gloomy eyes intensified as they opened
wide and stared at the sky, unseeingly.

“Ise bawn wid a cawl!” he exclaimed, loudly. His twisted frame was
braced to an extreme tension. “Ise bawn wid a cawl! De blood anssuh!”

“It wasn't the Cross-Roads, Uncle Xenophon,” said Warren Smith, laying
his hand on the old man's shoulder.

Xenophon rose to his feet. He stretched a long, bony arm straight to the
west, where the Cross-Roads lay; stood rigid and silent, like a seer;
then spoke:

“De men whut shot Marse Hawkliss lies yondeh, hidin' f'um de light o'
day. An' _him_”--he swerved his whole rigid body till the arm pointed
northwest--“he lies yondeh. You won't find him heah. Dey fought 'im een
de fiel's an' dey druggen 'im heah. Dis whim dey lay 'im down. Ise bawn
wid a cawl!”

There were exclamations from the listeners, for Xenophon spoke as one
having authority. Suddenly he turned and pointed his outstretched hand
full at Judge Briscoe.

“An' dass de main,” he cried, “dass de main kin tell you Ah speak de
trufe.”

Before he was answered, Eph Watts looked at Briscoe keenly and then
turned to Lige Willetts and whispered: “Get on your horse, ride in, and
ring the court-house bell like the devil. Do as I say!”

Tears stood in the judge's eyes. “It is so,” he said, solemnly. “He
speaks the truth. I didn't mean to tell it to-day, but somehow--” He
paused. “The hounds!” he cried. “They deserve it! My daughter saw them
crossing the fields in the night--saw them climb the fence, hoods,
gowns, and all, a big crowd of them. She and the lady who is visiting
us saw them, saw them plainly. The lady saw them several times, clear as
day, by the flashes of lightning--the scoundrels were coming this way.
They must have been dragging him with them then. He couldn't have had a
show for his life amongst them. Do what you like--maybe they've got him
at the Cross-Roads. If there's a chance of it--dead or alive--bring him
back!”

A voice rang out above the clamor that followed the judge's speech.

“'Bring him back!' God could, maybe, but He won't. Who's travelling
my way? I go west!” Hartley Bowlder had ridden his sorrel up the
embankment, and the horse stood between the rails. There was an angry
roar from the crowd; the prosecutor pleaded and threatened unheeded; and
as for the deputy sheriff, he declared his intention of taking with him
all who wished to go as his posse. Eph Watts succeeded in making himself
heard above the tumult.

“The Square!” he shouted. “Start from the Square. We want everybody, and
we'll need them. We want every one in Carlow to be implicated in this
posse.”

“They will be!” shouted a farmer. “Don't you worry about that.”

“We want to get into some sort of shape,” cried Eph.

“Shape, hell!” said Hartley Bowlder.

There was a hiss and clang and rattle behind him, and a steam whistle
shrieked. The crowd divided, and Hartley's sorrel jumped just in time as
the westbound accommodation rushed through on its way to Rouen. From the
rear platform leaned the sheriff, Horner, waving his hands frantically
as he flew by, but no one understood--or cared--what he said, or, in the
general excitement, even wondered why he was leaving the scene of
his duty at such a time. When the train had dwindled to a dot and
disappeared, and the noise of its rush grew faint, the court-house bell
was heard ringing, and the mob was piling pell-mell into the village to
form on the Square. The judge stood alone on the embankment.

“That settles it,” he said aloud, gloomily, watching the last figures.
He took off his hat and pushed back the thick, white hair from his
forehead. “Nothing to do but wait. Might as well go home for that. Blast
it!” he exclaimed, impatiently. “I don't want to go there. It's too hard
on the little girl. If she hadn't come till next week she'd never have
known John Harkless.”




CHAPTER XI. JOHN BROWN'S BODY

All morning horsemen had been galloping through Six-Cross-Roads,
sometimes singly, oftener in company. At one-o'clock the last posse
passed through on its return to the county-seat, and after that there
was a long, complete silence, while the miry corners were undisturbed by
a single hoof-beat. No unkempt colt nickered from his musty stall; the
sparse young corn that was used to rasp and chuckle greenly stood rigid
in the fields. Up the Plattville pike despairingly cackled one old
hen, with her wabbling sailor run, smit with a superstitious horror of
nothing, in the stillness; she hid herself in the shadow underneath a
rickety barn, and her shrieking ceased.

Only on the Wimby farm were there signs of life. The old lady who had
sent Harkless roses sat by the window all morning and wiped her eyes,
watching the horsemen ride by; sometimes they would hail her and tell
her there was nothing yet. About two-o'clock, her husband rattled up
in a buckboard, and got out the late, and more authentic, Mr. Wimby's
shot-gun, which he carefully cleaned and oiled, in spite of its
hammerless and quite useless condition, sitting, meanwhile, by the
window opposite his wife, and often looking up from his work to shake
his weak fist at his neighbors' domiciles and creak decrepit curses and
denunciations.

But the Cross-Roads was ready. It knew what was coming now. Frightened,
desperate, sullen, it was ready.

The afternoon wore on, and lengthening shadows fell upon a peaceful--one
would have said, a sleeping--country. The sun-dried pike, already dusty,
stretched its serene length between green borders flecked with purple
and yellow and white weedflowers; and the tree shadows were not shade,
but warm blue and lavender glows in the general pervasion of still,
bright light, the sky curving its deep, unburnished, penetrable blue
over all, with no single drift of fleece upon it to be reflected in
the creek that wound along past willow and sycamore. A woodpecker's
telegraphy broke the quiet like a volley of pistol shots.

But far eastward on the pike there slowly developed a soft, white haze.
It grew denser and larger. Gradually it rolled nearer. Dimly behind it
could be discerned a darker, moving nucleus that extended far back upon
the road. A heavy tremor began to stir the air--faint manifold sounds, a
waxing, increasing, multitudinous rumor.

The pike ascended a long, slight slope leading west up to the
Cross-Roads. From a thicket of iron-weed at the foot of this slope was
thrust the hard, lean visage of an undersized girl of fourteen. Her
fierce eyes examined the approaching cloud of dust intently. A redness
rose under the burnt yellow skin and colored the wizened cheeks.

They were coming.

She stepped quickly out of the tangle, and darted up the road, running
with the speed of a fleet little terrier, not opening her lips, not
calling out, but holding her two thin hands high above her head.
That was all. But Birnam wood was come to Dunsinane at last, and the
messenger sped. Out of the weeds in the corners of the snake fence,
in the upper part of the rise, silently lifted the heads of men whose
sallowness became a sickish white as the child flew by.

The mob was carefully organized. They had taken their time and had
prepared everything deliberately, knowing that nothing could stop them.
No one had any thought of concealment; it was all as open as the light
of day, all done in the broad sunshine. Nothing had been determined as
to what was to be done at the Cross-Roads more definite than that the
place was to be wiped out. That was comprehensive enough; the details
were quite certain to occur. They were all on foot, marching in fairly
regular ranks. In front walked Mr. Watts, the man Harkless had abhorred
in a public spirit and befriended in private--to-day he was a hero and
a leader, marching to avenge his professional oppressor and personal
brother. Cool, unruffled, and, to outward vision, unarmed, marching the
miles in his brown frock coat and generous linen, his carefully creased
trousers neatly turned up out of the dust, he led the way. On one side
of him were the two Bowlders, on the other was Lige Willetts, Mr.
Watts preserving peace between the two young men with perfect tact and
sang-froid.

They kept good order and a similitude of quiet for so many, except
far to the rear, where old Wilkerson was bringing up the tail of the
procession, dragging a wretched yellow dog by a slip-noose fastened
around the poor cur's protesting neck, the knot carefully arranged under
his right ear. In spite of every command and protest, Wilkerson had
marched the whole way uproariously singing, “John Brown's Body.”

The sun was in the west when they came in sight of the Cross-Roads, and
the cabins on the low slope stood out angularly against the radiance
beyond. As they beheld the hated settlement, the heretofore orderly
ranks showed a disposition to depart from the steady advance and rush
the shanties. Willetts, the Bowlders, Parker, Ross, Schofield, and fifty
others did, in fact, break away and set a sharp pace up the slope.

Watts tried to call them back. “What's the use your gettin' killed?” he
shouted.

“Why not?” answered Lige, who, like the others, was increasing his speed
when old “Wimby” rose up suddenly from the roadside ahead of them, and
motioned them frantically to go back. “They're laid out along the fence,
waitin' fer ye,” he warned them. “Git out the road. Come by the fields.
Per the Lord's sake, spread!” Then, as suddenly as he had appeared, he
dropped down into the weeds again. Lige and those with him paused, and
the whole body came to a halt while the leaders consulted. There was a
sound of metallic clicking and a thin rattle of steel. From far to the
rear came the voice of old Wilkerson:

   “John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
    John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground--”

A few near him, as they stood waiting, began to take up the burden of
the song, singing in slow time like a dirge; then those further away
took it up; it spread, reached the leaders; they, too, began to sing,
taking off their hats as they joined in; and soon the whole concourse,
solemn, earnest, and uncovered, was singing--a thunderous requiem for
John Harkless.

The sun was swinging lower and the edges of the world were embroidered
with gold while that deep volume of sound shook the air, the song of a
stern, savage, just cause--sung, perhaps, as some of the ancestors of
these men sang with Hampden before the bristling walls of a hostile
city. It had iron and steel in it. The men lying on their guns in the
ambuscade along the fence heard the dirge rise and grow to its mighty
fulness, and they shivered. One of them, posted nearest the advance,
had his rifle carefully levelled at Lige Willetts, a fair target in the
road. When he heard the singing, he turned to the man next behind
him and laughed harshly: “I reckon we'll see a big jamboree in hell
to-night, huh?”

The huge murmur of the chorus expanded, and gathered in rhythmic
strength, and swelled to power, and rolled and thundered across the
plain.

     “John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
      John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
      John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
               His soul goes marching on!
      Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!
      Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!
      Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!
               His soul goes marching on!”

A gun spat from the higher ground, and Willetts dropped where he stood,
but was up again in a second, with a red line across his forehead where
the ball had grazed his temple. Then the mob spread out like a fan,
hundreds of men climbing the fence and beginning the advance through
the fields, dosing on the ambuscade from both sides. Mr. Watts, wading
through the high grass in the field north of the road, perceived the
barrel of a gun shining from a bush some distance in front of him, and,
although in the same second no weapon was seen in his hand, discharged a
revolver at the bush behind the gun. Instantly ten or twelve men leaped
from their hiding-places along the fences of both fields, and, firing
hurriedly and harmlessly into the scattered ranks of the oncoming mob,
broke for the shelter of the houses, where their fellows were posted.
Taken on the flanks and from the rear, there was but one thing for
them to do to keep from being hemmed in and shot or captured. (They
excessively preferred being shot.) With a wild, high, joyous yell,
sounding like the bay of young hounds breaking into view of their
quarry, the Plattville men followed.

The most eastward of the debilitated edifices of Six-Cross-Roads was the
saloon, which bore the painted legends: on the west wall, “Last Chance”;
on the east wall, “First Chance.” Next to this, and separated by two
or three acres of weedy vacancy from the corners where the population
centred thickest, stood-if one may so predicate of a building which
leaned in seven directions-the house of Mr. Robert Skillett, the
proprietor of the saloon. Both buildings were shut up as tight as their
state of repair permitted. As they were furthest to the east, they
formed the nearest shelter, and to them the Cross-Roaders bent their
flight, though they stopped not here, but disappeared behind Skillett's
shanty, putting it between them and their pursuers, whose guns were
beginning to speak. The fugitives had a good start, and, being the
picked runners of the Cross-Roads, they crossed the open, weedy acres in
safety and made for their homes. Every house had become a fort, and the
defenders would have to be fought and torn out one by one. As the guns
sounded, a woman in a shanty near the forge began to scream, and kept on
screaming.

On came the farmers and the men of Plattville. They took the saloon at a
run; battered down the crazy doors with a fence-rail, and swarmed inside
like busy insects, making the place hum like a hive, but with the hotter
industries of destruction. It was empty of life as a tomb, but they beat
and tore and battered and broke and hammered and shattered like madmen;
they reduced the tawdry interior to a mere chaos, and came pouring forth
laden with trophies of ruin. And then there was a charry smell in the
air, and a slender feather of smoke floated up from a second-story
window.

At the same time Watts led an assault on the adjoining house--an assault
which came to a sudden pause, for, from cracks in the front wall, a
squirrel-rifle and a shot-gun snapped and banged, and the crowd fell
back in disorder. Homer Tibbs had a hat blown away, full of buck-shot
holes, while Mr. Watts solicitously examined a small aperture in the
skirts of his brown coat. The house commanded the road, and the rush of
the mob into the village was checked, but only for the instant.

A rickety woodshed, which formed a portion of the Skillett mansion,
closely joined the “Last Chance” side of the family place of business.
Scarcely had the guns of the defenders sounded, when, with a loud shout,
Lige Willetts leaped from an upper window on that side of the burning
saloon and landed on the woodshed, and, immediately climbing the roof
of the house itself, applied a fiery brand to the time-worn clapboards.
Ross Schofield dropped on the shed, close behind him, his arm lovingly
enfolding a gallon jug of whiskey, which he emptied (not without evident
regret) upon the clapboards as Lige fired them. Flames burst forth
almost instantly, and the smoke, uniting with that now rolling out
of every window of the saloon, went up to heaven in a cumbrous, gray
column.

As the flames began to spread, there was a rapid fusillade from the rear
of the house, and a hundred men and more, who had kept on through the
fields to the north, assailed it from behind. Their shots passed clear
through the flimsy partitions, and there was a horrid screeching, like a
beast's howls, from within. The front door was thrown open, and a lean,
fierce-eyed girl, with a case-knife in her hand, ran out in the face of
the mob. At sound of the shots in the rear they had begun to advance on
the house a second time, and Hartley Bowlder was the nearest man to the
girl. With awful words, and shrieking inconceivably, she made straight
at Hartley, and attacked him with the knife. She struck at him again
and again, and, in her anguish of hate and fear, was so extraordinary
a spectacle that she gained for her companions the four or five seconds
they needed to escape from the house. As she hurled herself alone at
the oncoming torrent, they sped from the door unnoticed, sprang over the
fence, and reached the open lots to the west before they were seen by
Willetts from the roof.

“Don't let 'em fool you!” he shouted. “Look to I your left! There they
go! Don't let 'em get away.”

The Cross-Readers were running across the field. They were Bob Skillett
and his younger brother, and Mr. Skillett was badly damaged: he seemed
to be holding his jaw on his face with both hands. The girl turned, and
sped after them. She was over the fence almost as soon as they were,
and the three ran in single file, the girl last. She was either
magnificently sacrificial and fearless, or she cunningly calculated that
the regulators would take no chances of killing a woman-child, for she
kept between their guns and her two companions, trying to cover and
shield the latter with her frail body.

“Shoot, Lige,” called Watts. “If we fire from here we'll hit the girl.
Shoot!”

Willetts and Ross Schofield were still standing on the roof, at the
edge, out of the smoke, and both fired at the same time. The fugitives
did not turn; they kept on running, and they had nearly reached the
other side of the field, when suddenly, without any premonitory gesture,
the elder Skillett dropped flat on his face. The Cross-Roaders stood by
each other that day, for four or five men ran out of the nearest shanty
into the open, lifted the prostrate figure from the ground, and began
to carry it back with them. But Mr. Skillett was alive; his curses were
heard above all other sounds. Lige and Schofield fired again, and one of
the rescuers staggered. Nevertheless, as the two men slid down from the
roof, the burdened Cross-Readers were seen to break into a run; and at
that, with another yell, fiercer, wilder, more joyous than the first,
the Plattville men followed.

The yell rang loudly in the ears of old Wilkerson, who had remained back
in the road, and at the same instant he heard another shout behind him.
Mr. Wilkerson had not shared in the attack, but, greatly preoccupied
with his own histrionic affairs, was proceeding up the pike
alone--except for the unhappy yellow mongrel, still dragged along by the
slip-noose--and alternating, as was his natural wont, from one fence to
the other; crouching behind every bush to fire an imaginary rifle at his
dog, and then springing out, with triumphant bellowings, to fall prone
upon the terrified animal. It was after one of these victories that a
shout of warning was raised behind him, and Mr. Wilkerson, by grace of
the god Bacchus, rolling out of the way in time to save his life, saw
a horse dash by him--a big, black horse whose polished flanks were
dripping with lather. Warren Smith was the rider. He was waving a slip
of yellow paper high in the air.

He rode up the slope, and drew rein beyond the burning buildings, just
ahead of those foremost in the pursuit. He threw his horse across the
road to oppose their progress, rose in his stirrups, and waved the paper
over his head. “Stop!” he roared, “Give me one minute. Stop!” He had a
grand voice; and he was known in many parts of the State for the great
bass roar with which he startled his juries. To be heard at a distance
most men lift the pitch of their voices; Smith lowered his an octave
or two, and the result was like an earthquake playing an organ in a
catacomb.

“Stop!” he thundered. “Stop!”

In answer, one of the flying Cross-Roaders turned and sent a bullet
whistling close to him. The lawyer paused long enough to bow deeply in
satirical response; then, flourishing the paper, he roared again: “Stop!
A mistake! I have news! Stop, I say! Homer has got them!”

To make himself heard over that tempestuous advance was a feat; for him,
moreover, whose counsels had so lately been derided, to interest the
pursuers at such a moment enough to make them listen--to find the
word--was a greater; and by the word, and by gestures at once vehemently
imperious and imploring, to stop them was still greater; but he did it.
He had come at just the moment before the moment that would have been
too late. They all heard him. They all knew, too, he was not trying to
save the Cross-Roads as a matter of duty, because he had given that up
before the mob left Plattville. Indeed, it was a question if, at the
last, he had not tacitly approved; and no one feared indictments for
the day's work. It would do no harm to listen to what he had to say. The
work could wait; it would “keep” for five minutes. They began to gather
around him, excited, flushed, perspiring, and smelling of smoke. Hartley
Bowlder, won by Lige's desperation and intrepidity, was helping the
latter tie up his head; no one else was hurt.

“What is it?” they clamored impatiently. “Speak quick!” There was
another harmless shot from a fugitive, and then the Cross-Roaders,
divining that the diversion was in their favor, secured themselves in
their decrepit fastnesses and held their fire. Meanwhile, the flames
crackled cheerfully in Plattville ears. No matter what the prosecutor
had to say, at least the Skillett saloon and homestead were gone, and
Bob Skillett and one other would be sick enough to be good for a while.

“Listen,” cried Warren Smith, and, rising in his stirrups again, read
the missive in his hand, a Western Union telegraph form. “Warren Smith,
Plattville,” was the direction. “Found both shell-men. Police familiar
with both, and both wanted here. One arrested at noon in a second-hand
clothes store, wearing Harkless's hat, also trying dispose torn
full-dress coat known to have been worn by Harkless last night. Stains
on lining believed blood. Second man found later at freight-yards in
empty lumber car left Plattville 1 P.M., badly hurt, shot, and
bruised. Supposed Harkless made hard fight. Hurt man taken to hospital
unconscious. Will die. Hope able question him first and discover
whereabouts body. Other man refuses talk so far. Check any movement
Cross-Roads. This clears Skillett, etc. Come over on 9.15.”

The telegram was signed by Homer and by Barrett, the superintendent of
police at Rouen.

“It's all a mistake, boys,” the lawyer said, as he handed the paper
to Watts and Parker for inspection. “The ladies at the judge's
were mistaken, that's all, and this proves it. It's easy enough to
understand: they were frightened by the storm, and, watching a fence
a quarter-mile away by flashes of lightning, any one would have been
confused, and imagined all the horrors on earth. I don't deny but what I
believed it for a while, and I don't deny but the Cross-Roads is pretty
tough, but you've done a good deal here already, to-day, and we're
saved in time from a mistake that would have turned out mighty bad. This
settles it. Homer got a wire from Rouen to come over there, soon as
they got track of the first man; that was when we saw him on the Rouen
accommodation.”

A slightly cracked voice, yet a huskily tuneful one, was lifted
quaveringly on the air from the roadside, where an old man and a yellow
dog sat in the dust together, the latter reprieved at the last moment,
his surprised head rakishly garnished with a hasty wreath of dog-fennel
daisies.

   “John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
            While we go marching on!”

Three-quarters of an hour later, the inhabitants of the Cross-Roads,
saved, they knew not how; guilty; knowing nothing of the fantastic
pendulum of opinion, which, swung by the events of the day, had marked
the fatal moment of guilt, now on others, now on them, who deserved
it--these natives and refugees, conscious of atrocity, dumfounded by a
miracle, thinking the world gone mad, hovered together in a dark, ragged
mass at the crossing corners, while the skeleton of the rotting buggy
in the slough rose behind them against the face of the west. They peered
with stupified eyes through the smoky twilight.

From afar, faintly through the gloaming, came mournfully to their ears
the many-voiced refrain--fainter, fainter:

    “John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
     John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground.
     John Brown's body lies--mould--
     ..... we go march....  on.”




CHAPTER XII. JERRY THE TELLER At midnight a small brougham stopped at
the gates of the city hospital in Rouen. A short distance ahead, the
lamps of a cab, drawn up at the curbing, made two dull orange sparks
under the electric light swinging over the street. A cigarette described
a brief parabola as it was tossed from the brougham, and a short young
man jumped out and entered the gates, then paused and spoke to the
driver of the cab.

“Did you bring Mr. Barrett here?”

“Yes, sir,” answered the driver; “him and two other gentlemen.”

Lighting another cigarette, from which he drew but two inspirations
before he threw it away, the young man proceeded quickly up the walk.
As he ascended the short flight of steps which led to the main doors,
he panted a little, in a way which suggested that (although his
white waistcoat outlined an ellipse still respectable) a crescendo of
portliness was playing diminuendo with his youth. And, though his
walk was brisk, it was not lively. The expression of his very red face
indicated that his briskness was spurred by anxiety, and a fattish groan
he emitted on the top step added the impression that his comfortable
body protested against the mental spur. In the hall he removed his
narrow-brimmed straw hat and presented a rotund and amiable head,
from the top of which his auburn hair seemed to retire with a sense of
defeat; it fell back, however, not in confusion, but in perfect order,
and the sparse pink mist left upon his crown gave, by a supreme effort,
an effect of arrangement, so that an imaginative observer would have
declared that there was a part down the middle. The gentleman's plump
face bore a grave and troubled expression, and gravity and trouble were
patent in all the lines of his figure and in every gesture; in the way
he turned his head; in the uneasy shifting of his hat from one hand to
the other and in his fanning himself with it in a nervous fashion;
and in his small, blue eyes, which did not twinkle behind his rimless
glasses and looked unused to not twinkling. His gravity clothed him
like an ill-fitting coat; or, possibly, he might have reminded the
imaginative observer, just now conjured up, of a music-box set to
turning its cylinder backwards.

He spoke to an attendant, and was directed to an office, which he
entered without delay. There were five men in the room, three of them
engaged in conversation near the door; another, a young surgeon, was
writing at a desk; the fifth drowsily nodding on a sofa. The newcomer
bowed as he entered.

“Mr. Barrett?” he said inquiringly.

One of the men near the door turned about. “Yes, sir,” he answered, with
a stem disfavor of the applicant; a disfavor possibly a perquisite of
his office. “What's wanted?”

“I think I have met you,” returned the other. “My name is Meredith.”

Mr. Barrett probably did not locate the meeting, but the name proved
an open sesame to his geniality, for he melted at once, and saying: “Of
course, of course, Mr. Meredith; did you want a talk with me?” clasped
the young man's hand confidentially in his, and, with an appearance
of assuring him that whatever the atrocity which had occurred in the
Meredith household it should be discreetly handled and hushed up,
indicated a disposition to conduct him toward a more appropriate
apartment for the rehearsal of scandal. The young man accepted the
hand-clasp with some resignation, but rejected the suggestion of
privacy.

“A telegram from Plattville reached me half an hour ago,” he said. “I
should have had it sooner, but I have been in the country all day.”

The two men who had been talking with the superintendent turned quickly,
and stared at the speaker. He went on: “Mr. Harkless was an old--and--”
 He broke off, with a sudden, sharp choking, and for a moment was unable
to control an emotion that seemed, for some reason, as surprising and
unbefitting, in a person of his rubicund presence, as was his gravity.
An astonished tear glittered in the corner of his eye. The grief of
the gayer sorts of stout people appears, sometimes, to dumfound even
themselves. The young man took off his glasses and wiped them slowly.
“--An old and very dear friend of mine.” He replaced the glasses
insecurely upon his nose. “I telephoned to your headquarters, and they
said you had come here.”

“Yes, sir; yes, sir,” the superintendent of police responded,
cheerfully. “These two gentlemen are from Plattville; Mr. Smith just
got in. They mighty near had big trouble down there to-day, but I guess
we'll settle things for 'em up here. Let me make you acquainted with my
friend, Mr. Smith, and my friend, Mr. Homer. Gentlemen, my friend, Mr.
Meredith, one of our well-known citizens.”

“You hear it from the police, gentlemen,” added Mr. Meredith, perking up
a little. “I know Dr. Gay.” He nodded to the surgeon.

“I suppose you have heard some of the circumstances--those that we've
given out,” said Barrett.

“I read the account in the evening paper. I had heard of Harkless, of
Carlow, before; but it never occurred to me that it was my friend--I had
heard he was abroad--until I got this telegram from a relative of mine
who happened to be down there.”

“Well,” said the superintendent, “your friend made a mighty good fight
before he gave up. The Teller, that's the man we've got out here, he's
so hacked up and shot and battered his mother wouldn't know him, if she
wanted to; at least, that's what Gay, here, says. We haven't seen him,
because the doctors have been at him ever since he was found, and they
expect to do some more tonight, when we've had our interview with
him, if he lives long enough. One of my sergeants found him in, the
freight-yards about four-o'clock and sent him here in the ambulance;
knew it was Teller, because he was stowed away in one of the empty cars
that came from Plattville last night, and Slattery--that's his running
mate, the one we caught with the coat and hat--gave in that they beat
their way on that freight. I guess Slattery let this one do most of the
fighting; he ain't scratched; but Mr. Harkless certainly made it hot for
the Teller.”

“My relative believes that Mr. Harkless is still alive,” said Meredith.

Mr. Barrett permitted himself an indulgent smile. He had the air of
having long ago discovered everything which anybody might wish to know,
and of knowing a great deal which he held in reserve because it was
necessary to suppress many facts for a purpose far beyond his auditor's
comprehension, though a very simple matter to himself.

“Well, hardly, I expect,” he replied, easily. “No; he's hardly alive.”

“Oh, don't say that,” said Meredith.

“I'm afraid Mr. Barrett has to say it,” broke in Warren Smith. “We're up
here to see this fellow before he dies, to try and get him to tell what
disposal they made of the----”

“Ah!” Meredith shivered. “I believe I'd rather he said the other than to
hear you say that.”

Mr. Horner felt the need of defending a fellow-townsman, and came to the
rescue, flushing painfully. “It's mighty bad, I know,” said the sheriff
of Carlow, the shadows of his honest, rough face falling in a solemn
pattern; “I reckon we hate to say it as much as you hate to hear it;
and Warren really didn't get the word out. It's stuck in our throats all
day; and I don't recollect as I heard a single man say it before I
left our city this morning. Our folks thought a great deal of him, Mr.
Meredith; I don't believe there's any thinks more. But it's come to that
now; you can't hardly see no chance left. We be'n sweating this other
man, Slattery, but we can't break him down. Jest tells us to go to”--the
sheriff paused, evidently deterred by the thought that swear-words were
unbefitting a hospital--“to the other place, and shets his jaw up tight.
The one up here is called the Teller, as Mr. Barrett says; his name's
Jerry the Teller. Well, we told Slattery that Jerry had died and left a
confession; tried to make him think there wasn't no hope fer him, and he
might as well up and tell his share; might git off easier; warned him to
look out for a mob if he didn't, maybe, and so on, but it never bothered
him at all. He's nervy, all right. Told us to go--that is, he said it
again--and swore the Teller was on his way to Chicago, swore he seen him
git on the train. Wouldn't say another word tell he got a lawyer. So,
'soon as it was any use, we come up here--they reckon he'll come to
before he dies. We'll be glad to have you go in with us,” Horner said
kindly. “I reckon it's all the same to Mr. Barrett.”

“He will die, will he, Gay?” Meredith asked, turning to the surgeon.

“Oh, not necessarily,” the young man replied, yawning slightly behind
his hand, and too long accustomed to straightforward questions to be
shocked at an evident wish for a direct reply. “His chances are better,
because they'll hang him if he gets well. They took the ball and a good
deal of shot out of his side, and there's a lot more for afterwhile, if
he lasts. He's been off the table an hour, and he's still going.”

“That's in his favor, isn't it?” said Meredith. “And extraordinary,
too?” If young Dr. Gay perceived a slur in these interrogations he
betrayed no exterior appreciation of it.

“Shot!” exclaimed Homer. “Shot! I knowed there'd be'n a pistol used,
though where they got it beats me--we stripped 'em--and it wasn't Mr.
Harkless's; he never carried one. But a shot-gun!”

An attendant entered and spoke to the surgeon, and Gay rose wearily,
touched the drowsy young man on the shoulder, and led the way to the
door. “You can come now,” he said to the others; “though I doubt its
being any good to you. He's delirious.”

They went down a long hall and up a narrow corridor, then stepped softly
into a small, quiet ward.

There was a pungent smell of chemicals in the room; the light was low,
and the dimness was imbued with a thick, confused murmur, incoherent
whisperings that came from a cot in the corner. It was the only cot in
use in the ward, and Meredith was conscious of a terror that made him
dread, to look at it, to go near it. Beside it a nurse sat silent, and
upon it feebly tossed the racked body of him whom Barrett had called
Jerry the Teller.

The head was a shapeless bundle, so swathed it was with bandages
and cloths, and what part of the face was visible was discolored and
pigmented with drugs. Stretched under the white sheet the man looked
immensely tall--as Horner saw with vague misgiving--and he lay in an
odd, inhuman fashion, as though he had been all broken to pieces.
His attempts to move were constantly soothed by the nurse, and he
as constantly renewed such attempts; and one hand, though torn and
bandaged, was not to be restrained from a wandering, restless movement
which Meredith felt to be pathetic. He had entered the room with a flare
of hate for the thug whom he had come to see die, and who had struck
down the old friend whose nearness he had never known until it was too
late. But at first sight of the broken figure he felt all animosity fall
away from him; only awe remained, and a growing, traitorous pity as he
watched the long, white fingers of the Teller “pick at the coverlet.”
 The man was muttering rapid fragments of words, and syllables.

“Somehow I feel a sense of wrong,” Meredith whispered to Gay. “I feel as
if I had done the fellow to death myself, as if it were all out of gear.
I know, now, how Henry felt over the great Guisard. My God, how tall he
looks! That doesn't seem to me like a thug's hand.”

The surgeon nodded. “Of course, if there's a mistake to be made, you can
count on Barrett and his sergeants to make it. I doubt if this is their
man. When they found him what clothes he wore were torn and stained; but
they had been good once, especially the linen.”

Barrett bent over the recumbent figure. “See here. Jerry,” he said, “I
want to talk to you a little. Rouse up, will you? I want to talk to you
as a friend.”

The incoherent muttering continued.

“See here, Jerry!” repeated Barrett, more sharply. “Jerry! rouse up,
will you? We don't want any fooling; understand that, Jerry!” He dropped
his hand on the man's shoulder and shook him slightly. The Teller
uttered a short, gasping cry.

“Let me,” said Gay, and swiftly interposed. Bending over the cot, he
said in a pleasant, soft voice: “It's all right, old man; it's all
right. Slattery wants to know what you did with that man down at
Plattville, when you got through with him. He can't remember, and he
thinks there was money left on him. Slattery's head was hurt--he can't
remember. He'll go shares with you, when he gets it. Slattery's going to
stand by you, if he can get the money.”

The Teller only tried to move his free hand to the shoulder Barrett had
shaken.

“Slattery wants to know,” repeated the surgeon, gently moving the hand
back upon the sheet. “He'll divvy up, when he gets it. He'll stand by
you, old man.”

“Would you please not mind,” whispered the Teller faintly, “would
you please not mind if you took care not to brush against my shoulder
again?”

The surgeon drew back with an exclamation; but the Teller's whisper
gathered strength, and they heard him murmuring oddly to himself.
Meredith moved forward.

“What's that?” he asked, with a startled gesture.

“Seems to be trying to sing, or something,” said Barrett, bending over
to listen. The Teller swung his arm heavily over the side of the cot,
the fingers never ceasing their painful twitching, and Gay leaned down
and gently moved the cloths so that the white, scarred lips were free.
They moved steadily; they seemed to be framing the semblance of an old
ballad that Meredith knew; the whisper grew more distinct, and it became
a rich but broken voice, and they heard it singing, like the sound of
some far, halting minstrelsy:

“Wave willows--murmur waters--golden sunbeams smile, Earthly
music--cannot waken--lovely--Annie Lisle.”

“My God!” cried Tom Meredith.

The bandaged hand waved jauntily over the Teller's head. “Ah, men,” he
said, almost clearly, and tried to lift himself on his arm, “I tell
you it's a grand eleven we have this year! There will be little left of
anything that stands against them. Did you see Jim Romley ride over his
man this afternoon?”

As the voice grew clearer the sheriff stepped forward, but Tom Meredith,
with a loud exclamation of grief, threw himself on his knees beside
the cot and seized the wandering fingers in his own. “John!” he cried.
“John! Is it _you_?”

The voice went on rapidly, not heeding him: “Ah, you needn't howl; I'd
have been as much use at right as that Sophomore. Well, laugh away, you
Indians! If it hadn't been for this ankle--but it seems to be my chest
that's hurt--and side--not that it matters, you know; the Sophomore's
just as good, or better. It's only my egotism. Yes, it must be
the side--and chest--and head--all over, I believe. Not that it
matters--I'll try again next year--next year I'll make it a daily, Helen
said, not that I should call you Helen--I mean Miss--Miss--Fisbee--no,
Sherwood--but I've always thought Helen was the prettiest name in the
world--you'll forgive me?--And please tell Parker there's no more
copy, and won't be--I wouldn't grind out another stick to save
his immortal--yes, yes, a daily--she said-ah, I never made a good
trade--no--they can't come seven miles--but I'll finish _you_, Skillett,
first; I know _you_! I know nearly all of you! Now let's sing 'Annie
Lisle.'” He lifted his hand as if to beat the time for a chorus.

“Oh, John, John!” cried Tom Meredith, and sobbed outright. “My boy--my
boy--old friend----” The cry of the classmate was like that of a mother,
for it was his old idol and hero who lay helpless and broken before him.



The brougham lamps and the apathetic sparks of the cab gleamed in front
of the hospital till daylight. Two other pairs of lamps joined them
in the earliest of the small hours, these subjoined to two deep-hooded
phaetons, from each of which quickly descended a gentleman with a beard,
an air of eminence, and a small, ominous black box. The air of eminence
was justified by the haste with which Meredith had sent for them, and by
their wide repute. They arrived almost simultaneously, and hastily shook
hands as they made their way to the ward down the long hall and up the
narrow corridor. They had a short conversation with Gay and a word
with the nurse, then turned the others out of the room by a practiced
innuendo of manner. They stayed a long time in the room without opening
the door. Meredith paced the hall alone, sometimes stopping to speak
to Warren Smith; but the two officials of peace sat together in dumb
consternation and astonishment. The sleepy young man relaxed himself
resignedly upon a bench in the hall had returned to the dormance from
which he had been roused. The big hospital was very still. Now and then
a nurse went through the hall, carrying something, and sometimes a
neat young physician passed cheerfully along, looking as if he had many
patients who were well enough to testify to his skill, but sick enough
to pay for it. Outside, through the open front doors, the crickets
chirped.

Meredith went out on the steps, and breathed the cool night air. A
slender taint of drugs hung everywhere about the building, and the
almost imperceptible permeation sickened him; it was deadly, he thought,
and imbued with a hideous portent of suffering. That John Harkless, of
all men, should lie stifled with ether, and bandaged and splintered,
and smeared with horrible unguents, while they stabbed and slashed
and tortured him, and made an outrage and a sin of that grand, big,
dexterous body of his! Meredith shuddered. The lights in the little
ward were turned up, and they seemed to shine from a chamber of
horrors, while he waited, as a brother might have waited outside the
Inquisition--if, indeed, a brother would have been allowed to wait
outside the Inquisition.

Alas, he had found John Harkless! He had “lost track” of him as men
sometimes do lose track of their best beloved, but it had always been a
comfort to know that Harkless _was_--somewhere, a comfort without which
he could hardly have got along. Like others he had been waiting for John
to turn up--on top, of course; for people would always believe in him
so, that he would be shoved ahead, no matter how much he hung back
himself--but Meredith had not expected him to turn up in Indiana. He had
heard vaguely that Harkless was abroad, and he had a general expectation
that people would hear of him over there some day, with papers like the
“Times” beseeching him to go on missions. And he found him here, in his
own home, a stranger, alone and dying, receiving what ministrations were
reserved for Jerry the Teller. But it was Helen Sherwood who had found
him. He wondered how much those two had seen of each other, down there
in Plattville. If they had liked each other, and Harkless could have
lived, he thought it might have simplified some things for Helen. “Poor
Helen!” he exclaimed aloud. Her telegram had a ring, even in the barren
four sentences. He wondered how much they had liked each other. Perhaps
she would wish to come at once. When those fellows came out of the room
he would send her a word by telegraph.

When they came out--ah! he did not want them to come out; he was afraid.
They were an eternity--why didn't they come? No; he hoped they would not
come, just now. In a little time, in a few minutes, even, he would not
dread a few words so much; but _now_ he couldn't quite bear to be told
he had found his friend only to lose him, the man he had always most
needed, wanted, loved. Everybody had always cared for Harkless, wherever
he went. That _he_ had always cared for everybody was part of the
reason, maybe. Meredith remembered, now, hearing a man who had spent a
day in Plattville on business speak of him: “They've got a young fellow
down there who'll be Governor in a few years. He's a sort of dictator;
and runs the party all over that part of the State to suit his own sweet
will, just by sheer personality. And there isn't a man in that district
who wouldn't cheerfully lie down in the mud to let him pass over dry.
It's that young Harkless, you know; owns the 'Herald,' the paper
that downed McCune and smashed those imitation 'White-Caps' in Carlow
County.” Meredith had been momentarily struck by the coincidence of the
name, but his notion of Harkless was so inseparably connected with
what was (to his mind) a handsome and more spacious--certainly more
illuminated--field of action, that the idea that this might be his
friend never entered his head. Helen had said something once--he could
not remember what--that made him think she had half suspected it, and
he had laughed. He thought of the whimsical fate that had taken her to
Plattville, of the reason for her going, and the old thought came to
him that the world is, after all, so very small. He looked up at the
twinkling stars; they were reassuring and kind. Under their benignancy
no loss could befall, no fate miscarry--for in his last thought he felt
his vision opened, for the moment, to perceive a fine tracery of fate.

“Ah, that would be too beautiful!” he said.

And then he shivered; for his name was spoken from within.

It was soon plain to him that he need not have feared a few words, for
he did not in the least understand those with which the eminent surgeons
favored him; and they at once took their departure. He did understand,
however, what Horner told him. Mr. Barrett, Warren Smith, and the sleepy
young man had reentered the ward; and Horner was following, but waited
for Meredith. Somehow, the look of the sheriff's Sunday coat, wrinkling
forlornly from his broad, bent shoulders, was both touching and solemn.
He said simply: “He's conscious and not out of his head. They're gone in
to take his ante-mortem statement,” and they went into the room.

Harkless's eyes were bandaged. The lawyer was speaking to him, and as
Horner went awkwardly toward the cot. Warren said something indicative
of the sheriff's presence, and the hand on the sheet made a formless
motion which Horner understood, for he took the pale fingers in his own,
very gently, and then set them back. Smith turned toward Meredith, but
the latter made a gesture which forbade the attorney to speak of him,
and went to a corner and sat down with his head in his hands.

The sleepy young man opened a notebook and shook a stylographic pen so
that the ink might flow freely. The lawyer, briefly and with unlegal
agitation, administered an oath, to which Harkless responded feebly, and
then there was silence.

“Now, Mr. Harkless, if you please,” said Barrett, insinuatingly; “if you
feel like telling us as much as you can about it?”

He answered in a low, rather indistinct voice, very deliberately,
pausing before almost every word. It was easy work for the sleepy
stenographer.

“I understand. I don't want to go off my head again before I finish.
Of course I know why you want this. If it were only for myself I should
tell you nothing, because, if I am to leave, I should like it better if
no one were punished. But that's a bad community over there; they are
everlastingly worrying our people; they have always been a bother to
us, and it's time it was stopped for good. I don't believe very much
in punishment, but you can't do a great deal of reforming with the
Cross-Roaders unless you catch them young--very young, before they're
weaned--they wean them on whiskey, I think. I realize you needn't have
sworn me for me to tell you this.”

Homer and Smith had started at the mention of the Cross-Roads, but they
subdued their ejaculations, while Mr. Barrett looked as if he had known
it, of course. The room was still, save for the dim voice and the soft
transcribings of the stylographic pen.

“I left Judge Briscoe's, and went west on the pike to a big tree. It
rained, and I stepped under the tree for shelter. There was a man on the
other side of the fence. It was Bob Skillett. He was carrying his gown
and hood--I suppose it was that--on his arm. Then I saw two others a
little farther east, in the middle of the road; and I think they had
followed me from the Briscoes', or near there. They had their foolish
regalia on, as all the rest had,--there was plenty of lightning to see.
The two in the road were simply standing there in the rain, looking
at me through the eye-holes in their hoods. I knew there were
others--plenty--but I thought they were coming from behind me--the west.

“I wanted to get home--the court-house yard was good enough for me--so I
started east, toward town. I passed the two gentlemen; and one fell down
as I went by him, but the other fired a shot as a signal, and I got
his hood off his face for it--I stopped long enough--and it was Force
Johnson. I know him well. Then I ran, and they followed. A little ahead
of me I saw six or eight of them spread across the road. I knew I'd have
a time getting through, so I jumped the fence to cut across the fields,
and I lit in a swarm of them--it had rained them just where I jumped. I
set my back to the fence, but one of the fellows in the road leaned over
and smashed my head in, rather--with the butt of a gun, I believe. I
came out from the fence and they made a little circle around me. No
one said anything. I saw they had ropes and saplings, and I didn't want
that, exactly, so I went into them. I got a good many hoods off before
it was over, and I can swear to quite a number besides those I told
you.”

He named the men, slowly and carefully. Then he went on: “I think
they gave up the notion of whipping. We all got into a bunch, and they
couldn't clear to shoot without hitting some of their own: and there was
a lot of gouging and kicking--one fellow nearly got my left eye, and
I tried to tear him apart and he screamed so that I think he was hurt.
Once or twice I thought I might get away, but somebody hammered me over
the head and face again, and I got dizzy; and then they all jumped away
from me suddenly, and Bob Skillett stepped up--and--shot me. He waited
for a good flurry of lightning, and I was slow tumbling down. Some one
else fired a shot-gun, I think--I can't be sure--about the same time,
from the side. I tried to get up, but I couldn't, and then they got
together, for a consultation. The man I had hurt--I didn't recognize
him--came and looked at me. He was nursing himself all over; and
groaned; and I laughed, I--at any rate, my arm was lying stretched out
on the grass, and he stamped his heel into my hand, and after a little
of that I quit feeling.

“I'm not quite clear about what happened afterwards. They went away, not
far, I think. There's an old shed, a cattle-shelter, near there, and
I think the storm drove them under it to wait for a slack. It seemed a
long time. Sometimes I was conscious, sometimes I wasn't. I thought
I might be drowned, but I suppose the rain was good for me. Then I
remember being in motion, being dragged and carried a long way. They
took me up a steep, short slope, and set me down near the top. I knew
that was the railroad embankment, and I thought they meant to lay me
across the track, but it didn't occur to them, I suppose--they are not
familiar with melodrama--and a long time after that I felt and heard a
great banging and rattling under me and all about me, and it came to me
that they had disposed of me by hoisting me into an empty freight-car.
The odd part of it was that the car wasn't empty, for there were two men
already in it, and I knew them by what they said to me.

“They were the two shell-men who cheated Hartley Bowlder, and they
weren't vindictive; they even seemed to be trying to help me a little,
though perhaps they were only stealing my clothes, and maybe they
thought for them to do anything unpleasant would be superfluous; I could
see that they thought I was done for, and that they had been hiding in
the car when I was put there. I asked them to try to call the train
men for me, but they wouldn't listen, or else I couldn't make myself
understood. That's all. The rest is a blur. I haven't known anything
more until those surgeons were here. Please tell me how long ago it
happened. I shall not die, I think; there are a good many things I want
to know about.” He moved restlessly and the nurse soothed him.

Meredith rose and left the room with a noiseless step. He went out
to the stars again, and looked to them to check the storm of rage and
sorrow that buffeted his bosom. He understood lynching, now the thing
was home to him, and his feeling was no inspiration of a fear lest the
law miscarry; it was the itch to get his own hand on the rope. Horner
came out presently, and whispered a long, broad, profound curse upon
the men of the Cross-Roads, and Meredith's gratitude to him was keen.
Barrett went away, soon after, leaving the cab for the gentlemen from
Plattville. Meredith had a strange, unreasonable desire to kick Barrett,
possibly for his sergeant's sake. Warren Smith sat in the ward with the
nurse and Gay, and the room was very quiet. It was a long vigil.

They were only waiting.

At five o'clock he was still alive--just that, Smith came out to say.
Meredith sent his driver with a telegram to Helen which would give
Plattville the news that Harkless was found and was not yet gone from
them. Homer took the cab and left for the station; there was a train,
and there were things for him to do in Carlow. At noon Meredith sent
a second telegram to Helen, as barren of detail as the first: he was
alive--was a little improved. This telegram did not reach her, for she
was on the way to Rouen, and half of the population of Carlow--at least,
so it appeared to the unhappy conductor of the accommodation--was with
her.

They seemed to feel that they could camp in the hospital halls and
corridors, and they were an incalculable worry to the authorities. More
came on every train, and nearly all brought flowers, and jelly, and
chickens for preparing broth, and they insisted that the two latter
delicacies be fed to the patient at once. Meredith was possessed by an
unaccountable responsibility for them all, and invited a great many to
stay at his own house. They were still in ignorance of the truth about
the Cross-Roads, and some of them spent the day (it was Sunday) in
planning an assault upon the Rouen jail for the purpose of lynching
Slattery in case Harkless's condition did not improve at once. Those who
had heard his statement kept close mouths until the story appeared
in full in the Rouen papers on Monday morning; but by that time every
member of the Cross-Roads White-Caps was lodged in the Rouen jail with
Slattery. Homer and a heavily armed posse rode over to the muddy corners
on Sunday night, and the sheriff discovered that he might have taken the
Skilletts and Johnsons single-handed and unarmed. Their nerve was
gone; they were shaken and afraid; and, to employ a figure somewhat
inappropriate to their sullen, glad surrender, they fell upon his neck
in their relief at finding the law touching them. They had no wish to
hear “John Brown's Body” again. They wanted to get inside of a strong
jail, and to throw themselves on the mercy of the court as soon as
possible. And those whom Harkless had not recognized delayed not to give
themselves up; they did not desire to remain in Six-Cross-Roads. Bob
Skillett, Force Johnson, and one or two others needed the care of a
physician badly, and one man was suffering from a severely wrenched
back. Homer had a train stopped at a crossing, so that his prisoners
need not be taken through Plattville, and he brought them all safely
to Rouen. Had there chanced any one to ride through the deserted
Cross-Roads the next morning, passing the trampled fields and the
charred ruins of the two shanties to the east, and listening to the
lamentations of the women and children, he would have declared that at
last the old score had been paid, and that Six-Cross-Roads was wiped
out.

The Carlow folks were deeply impressed with the two eminent surgeons,
of whom some of them had heard, and on Tuesday, the bulletins marking
considerable encouragement, most of them decided to temporarily risk the
editor of the “Herald” to such capable hands, and they returned quietly
to their homes; only a few were delayed in reaching Carlow by travelling
to the first station in the opposite direction before they succeeded in
planting themselves on the proper train.

Meanwhile, the object of their solicitude tossed and burned on his bed
of pain. He was delirious most of the time, and, in the intervals of
half-consciousness, found that his desire to live, very strong at first,
had disappeared; he did not care much about anything except rest--he
wanted peace. In his wanderings he was almost always back in his college
days, beholding them in an unhappy, distorted fashion. He would lie
asprawl on the sward with the others, listening to the Seniors singing
on the steps, and, all at once, the old, kindly faces would expand
enormously and press over him with hideous mouthings, and an ugly Senior
in cap and gown would stamp him and grind a spiked heel into his hand;
then they would toss him high into air that was all flames, and he would
fall and fall through the raging heat, seeing the cool earth far beneath
him, but never able to get down to it again. And then he was driven
miles and miles by dusky figures, through a rain of boiling water; and
at other times the whole universe was a vast, hot brass bell, and it
gave off a huge, continuous roar and hum, while he was a mere point of
consciousness floating in the exact centre of the heat and sound waves,
and he listened, listened for years, to the awful, brazen hum from which
there could be no escape; at the same time it seemed to him that he was
only a Freshman on the slippery roof of the tower, trying to steal the
clapper of the chapel bell.

Finally he came to what he would have considered a lucid interval, had
it not appeared that Helen Sherwood was whispering to Tom Meredith at
the foot of his bed. This he knew to be a fictitious presentation of
his fever, for was she not by this time away and away for foreign lands?
And, also, Tom Meredith was a slim young thing, and not the middle-aged
youth with an undeniable stomach and a baldish head, who, by the
grotesque necromancy of his hallucinations, assumed a preposterous
likeness to his old friend. He waved his hand to the figures and they
vanished like figments of a dream; but all the same the vision had been
realistic enough for the lady to look exquisitely pretty. No one could
help wishing to stay in a world which contained as charming a picture as
that.

And then, too quickly, the moment of clearness passed; and he was
troubled about the “Herald,” beseeching those near him to put copies
of the paper in his hands, threatening angrily to believe they were
deceiving him, that his paper had suspended, if the three issues of
the week were not instantly produced. What did they mean by keeping the
truth from him? He knew the “Herald” had not come out. Who was there to
get it out in his absence? He raised himself on his elbow and struggled
to be up; and they had hard work to quiet him.

But the next night Meredith waited near his bedside, haggard and
dishevelled. Harkless had been lying in a long stupor; suddenly he
spoke, quite loudly, and the young surgeon, Gay, who leaned over him,
remembered the words and the tone all his life.

“Away and away--across the waters,” said John Harkless. “She was
here--once--in June.”

“What is it, John?” whispered Meredith, huskily. “You're easier, aren't
you?”

And John smiled a little, as if, for an instant, his swathed eyes
penetrated the bandages, and saw and knew his old friend again.

That same night a friend of Rodney McCune's sent a telegram from Rouen:
“He is dying. His paper is dead. Your name goes before convention in
September.”




CHAPTER XIII. JAMES FISBEE

On Monday morning three men sat in council in the “Herald” office; that
is, if staring out of dingy windows in a demented silence may be
called sitting in council; that was what Mr. Fisbee and Parker and Ross
Schofield were doing. By almost desperate exertions, these three and Bud
Tipworthy had managed to place before the public the issues of the paper
for the previous week, unaided by their chief, or, rather, aided by long
accounts of his condition and the manner of his mishap; and, in
truth, three copies were at that moment in the possession of Dr. Gay,
accompanied by a note from Parker warning the surgeon to exhibit them to
his patient only as a last resort, as the foreman feared the perusal of
them might cause a relapse.

By indiscriminate turns, acting as editors, reporters, and
typesetters--and particularly space-writers--the three men had worried
out three issues, and part of the fourth (to appear the next morning)
was set up; but they had come to the end of their string, and there were
various horrid gaps yet to fill in spite of a too generous spreading of
advertisements. Bud Tipworthy had been sent out to besiege Miss Tibbs,
all of whose recent buds of rhyme had been hot-housed into inky blossom
during the week, and after a long absence the youth returned with a
somewhat abrupt quatrain, entitled “The Parisians of Old,” which she had
produced while he waited--only four lines, according to the measure they
meted, which was not regardful of art--less than a drop in the bucket,
or, to preserve the figure, a single posy where they needed a bouquet.
Bud went down the rickety outside stairs, and sat on the lowest
step, whistling “Wait till the Clouds Roll by, Jenny”; Ross Schofield
descended to set up the quatrain, and Fisbee and Parker were left to
silence and troubled meditation.

They were seated on opposite sides of Harkless's desk. Sheets of blank
scratch-paper lay before them, and they relaxed not their knit brows.
Now and then, one of them, after gazing vacantly about the room for
ten or fifteen minutes, would attack the sheet before him with fiercest
energy; then the energy would taper off, and the paragraph halt, the
writer peruse it dubiously, then angrily tear off the sheet and hurl
it to the floor. All around them lay these snowballs of defeated
journalism.

Mr. Parker was a long, loose, gaunt gentleman, with a peremptory
forehead and a capable jaw, but on the present occasion his capability
was baffled and swamped in the attempt to steer the craft of his talent
up an unaccustomed channel without a pilot. “I don't see as it's any
use, Fisbee,” he said, morosely, after a series of efforts that littered
the floor in every direction. “I'm a born compositor, and I can't shift
my trade. I stood the pace fairly for a week, but I'll have to give up;
I'm run plumb dry. I only hope they won't show him our Saturday with
your three columns of 'A Word of the Lotus Motive,' reprinted from
February. I begin to sympathize with the boss, because I know what he
felt when I ballyragged him for copy. Yes, sir, I know how it is to be
an editor in a dead town now.”

“We must remember, too,” said his companion, thoughtfully, “there is the
Thursday issue of this week to be prepared, almost at once.”

“_Don't_! Please don't mention that, Fisbee!” Parker tilted far back in
his chair with his feet anchored under the desk, preserving a precarious
balance. “I ain't as grateful for my promotion to joint Editor-in-Chief
as I might be. I'm a middling poor man for the hour, I guess,” he
remarked, painfully following the peregrinations of a fly on his
companion's sleeve.

Mr. Fisbee twisted up another sheet, and employed his eyes in following
the course of a crack in the plaster, a slender black aperture which
staggered across the dusty ceiling and down the dustier wall to
disappear behind a still dustier map of Carlow County. “That's the
trouble!” exclaimed Parker, observing the other's preoccupation. “Soon
as you get to writing a line or two that seems kind of promising, you
begin to take a morbid interest in that blamed crack. It's busted up
enough copy for me, the last eight days, to have filled her up twenty
times over. I don't know as I ever care to see that crack again. I
turned my back on it, but there wasn't any use in that, because if a
fly lights on you I watch him like a brother, and if there ain't any fly
I've caught a mania for tapping my teeth with a pencil, that is just as
good.”

To these two gentlemen, thus disengaged, reentered (after a much longer
absence than Miss Selina's quatrain justified) Mr. Ross Schofield, a
healthy glow of exertion lending pleasant color to his earnest visage,
and an almost visible laurel of success crowning his brows. In addition
to this imaginary ornament, he was horned with pencils over both ears,
and held some scribbled sheets in his hand.

“I done a good deal down there,” he announced cheerfully, drawing up a
chair to the desk. “I thought up a heap of things I've heard lately, and
they'll fill up mighty well. That there poem of Miss Seliny's was a kind
of an inspiration to me, and I tried one myself, and it didn't come
hard at all. When I got started once, it jest seemed to flow from me.
I didn't set none of it up,” he added modestly, but with evident
consciousness of having unearthed genius in himself and an elate
foreknowledge of the treat in store for his companions. “I thought I'd
ort to see how you liked it first.” He offered the papers to Mr. Parker,
but the foreman shook his head.

“You read it, Ross,” I said. “I don't believe I feel hearty enough
to-day. Read the items first--we can bear the waiting.”

“What waiting?” inquired Mr. Schofield.

“For the poem,” replied Parker, grimly.

With a vague but not fleeting smile, Ross settled the sheets in order,
and exhibited tokens of that pleasant nevousness incident to appearing
before a critical audience, armed with literature whose merits should
delight them out of the critical attitude. “I run across a great scheme
down there,” he volunteered amiably, by way of preface; “I described
everything in full, in as many words as I could think up; it's mighty
filling, and it'll please the public, too; it gives 'em a lot more
information than they us'ally git. I reckon there's two sticks of jest
them extry words alone.”

“Go on,” said the foreman, rather ominously.

Ross began to read, a matter necessitating a puckered brow and at times
an amount of hesitancy and ruminating, as his results had already cooled
a little, and he found his hand difficult to decipher. “Here's the
first,” he said:

“'The large and handsome, fawn-colored, two years and one-half year old
Jersey of Frederick Bibshaw Jones, Esquire----'”

The foreman interrupted him: “Every reader of the 'Herald' will be glad
to know that Jersey's age and color! But go on.”

“'--Frederick Bibshaw Jones, Esquire,'” pursued his assistant, with
some discomfiture, “'--Esquire, our popular and well-dressed
fellow-citizen----'”

“You're right; Bib Jones is a heavy swell,” said Parker in a breaking
voice.

“'--Citizen, can be daily seen wandering from the far end of his
pasture-lot to the other far end of it.'”

“'His!'” exclaimed Parker. “'_His_ pasture-lot?' The Jersey's?”

“No,” returned the other, meekly, “Bib Jones's.”

“Oh,” said Parker. “Is that the end of that item? It is! You want to get
out of Plattville, my friend; it's too small for you; you go to Rouen
and you'll be city editor of the 'Journal' inside of a week. Let's have
another.”

Mr. Schofield looked up blankly; however, he felt that there was enough
live, legitimate news in his other items to redeem the somewhat tame
quality of the first, and so, after having crossed out several of the
extra words which had met so poor a reception, he proceeded:

“'Whit Upton's pigs broke out last Wednesday and rooted up a fine patch
of garden truck. Hard luck, Whit.'

“'Jerusalem Hawkins took a drive yesterday afternoon. He had the bay
to his side-bar. Jee's buggy has been recently washed. Congratulations,
Jee.'”

“There's thrilling information!” shouted the foreman. “That'll touch the
gentle reader to the marrow. The boss had to use some pretty rotten copy
himself, but he never got as low as that. But we'll use it; oh, we'll
use it! If we don't get her out he'll have a set-back, but if they show
her to him it'll kill him. If it doesn't, and he gets well, he'll kill
us. But we'll use it, Ross. Don't read any more to us, though; I feel
weaker than I did, and I wasn't strong before. Go down and set it all
up.”

Mr. Schofield rejoined with an injured air, and yet hopefully: “I'd like
to see what you think of the poetry--it seemed all right to me, but I
reckon you ain't ever the best judge of your own work. Shall I read it?”
 The foreman only glanced at him in silence, and the young man took this
for assent. “I haven't made up any name for it yet.”

            “'O, the orphan boy stood on the hill,
              The wind blew cold and very chill--'”

Glancing at his auditors, he was a trifle abashed to observe a glaze
upon the eyes of Mr. Parker, while a purple tide rose above his
neck-band and unnaturally distended his throat and temples. With a
placative little laugh, Mr. Schofield remarked: “I git the swing to her
all right, I reckon, but somehow it doesn't sound so kind of good as
when I was writing it.” There was no response, and he went on hurriedly:

            “'But there he saw the little rill--'”

The poet paused to say, with another amiable laugh: “It's sort of hard
to git out of them ill, hill, chill rhymes once you strike 'em. It runs
on like this:

                                        “'--Little rill
         That curved and spattered around the hill.'

“I guess that's all right, to use 'hill' twice; don't you reckon so?

            “'And the orphan he stood there until
              The wind and all gave him a chill;
              And he sickened--'”

That day Ross read no more, for the tall printer, seemingly incapable
of coherent speech, kicked the desk impotently, threw his arms above
his head, and, his companions confidently looking to see him foam at the
mouth, lost his balance and toppled over backward, his extensive legs
waving wildly in the air as he struck the floor. Mr. Schofield fled.

Parker made no effort to rise, but lay glaring at the ceiling, breathing
hard. He remained in that position for a long time, until finally the
glaze wore away from his eyes and a more rational expression settled
over his features. Mr. Fisbee addressed him timidly: “You don't think we
could reduce the size of the sheet?”

“It would kill him,” answered his prostrate companion. “We've got to
fill her solid some way, though I give up; I don't know how. How that
man has worked! It was genius. He just floated around the county and
soaked in items, and he wrote editorials that people read. One thing's
certain: we can't do it. We're ruining his paper for him, and when he
gets able to read, it'll hurt him bad. Mighty few knew how much pride he
had in it. Has it struck you that now would be a precious good time for
it to occur to Rod McCune to come out of his hole? Suppose we go by the
board, what's to stop him? What's to stop him, anyway? Who knows where
the boss put those copies and affidavits, and if we did know, would we
know the best way to use 'em? If we did, what's to keep the 'Herald'
alive until McCune lifts his head? And if we don't stop him, the 'Carlow
County Herald' is finished. Something's got to be done!'”

No one realized this more poignantly than Mr. Fisbee, but no one was
less capable of doing something of his own initiation. And although
the Tuesday issue was forthcoming, embarrassingly pale in spots--most
spots--Mr. Martin remarked rather publicly that the items were not what
you might call stirring, and that the unpatented pages put him in mind
of Jones's field in winter with a dozen chunks of coal dropped in the
snow. And his observations on the later issues of the week (issues which
were put forth with a suggestion of spasm, and possibly to the permanent
injury of Mr. Parker's health, he looked so thin) were too cruelly
unkind to be repeated here. Indeed, Mr. Fisbee, Parker, the luckless Mr.
Schofield, and the young Tipworthy may be not untruthfully likened to
a band of devoted mariners lost in the cold and glaring regions of a
journalistic Greenland: limitless plains of empty white paper extending
about them as far as the eye could reach, while life depended upon their
making these terrible voids productive; and they shrank appalled from
the task, knowing no means to fertilize the barrens; having no talent to
bring the still snows into harvests, and already feeling-in the chill of
Mr. Martin's remarks--a touch of the frost that might wither them.

It was Fisbee who caught the first glimpse of a relief expedition
clipping the rough seas on its lively way to rescue them, and, although
his first glimpse of the jaunty pennant of the relieving vessels was
over the shoulder of an iceberg, nothing was surer than that the craft
was flying to them with all good and joyous speed. The iceberg just
mentioned assumed--by no melting process, one may be sure--the form of a
long letter, first postmarked at Rouen, and its latter substance was as
follows:


“Henry and I have always believed you as selfish, James Fisbee, as
you are self-ingrossed and incapable. She has told us of your
'renunciation'; of your 'forbidding' her to remain with you; how you
'commanded,' after you had 'begged' her, to return to us, and how her
conscience told her she should stay and share your life in spite of
our long care of her, but that she yielded to your 'wishes' and our
entreaty. What have you ever done for her and what have you to offer
her? She is our daughter, and needless to say we shall still take care
of her, for no one believes you capable of it, even in that miserable
place, and, of course, in time she will return to her better wisdom,
her home, and her duty. I need scarcely say we have given up the happy
months we had planned to spend in Dresden. Henry and I can only stay at
home to pray that her preposterous mania will wear itself out in short
order, as she will find herself unfitted for the ridiculous task which
she insists upon attempting against the earnest wishes of us who have
been more than father and mother to her. Of course, she has talked
volumes of her affection for us, and of her gratitude, which we do not
want--we only want her to stay with us. Please, please try to make her
come back to us--we cannot bear it long. If you are a man you will send
her to us soon. Her excuse for not returning on the day we wired our
intention to go abroad at once (and I may as well tell you now that our
intention to go was formed in order to bring affairs to a crisis and to
draw her away from your influence--we always dreaded her visit to you
and held it off for years)--her excuse was that your best friend, and,
as I understand it, your patron, had been injured in some brawl in
that Christian country of yours--a charming place to take a girl like
her--and she would not leave you in your 'distress' until more was known
of the man's injuries. And now she insists--and you will know it from
her by the next mail--on returning to Plattville, forsooth, because
she has been reading your newspaper, and she says she knows you are in
difficulties over it, and it is her moral obligation--as by some wild
reasoning of her own she considers herself responsible for your ruffling
patron's having been alone when he was shot--to go down and help. I
suppose he made love to her, as all the young men she meets always do,
sooner or later, but I have no fear of any rustic entanglements tor her;
she has never been really interested, save in one affair. We are
quite powerless--we have done everything; but we cannot alter her
determination to edit your paper for you. Naturally, she knows nothing
whatever about such work, but she says, with the air of triumphantly
quelching all such argument, that she has talked a great deal to Mr.
Macauley of the 'Journal.' Mr. Macauley is the affair I have alluded to;
he is what she has meant when she has said, at different times, that she
was interested in journalism. But she is very business-like now. She
has bought a typewriter and purchased a great number of soft pencils and
erasers at an art shop; I am only surprised that she does not intend to
edit your miserable paper in water-colors. She is coming at once. For
mercy's sake don't telegraph her not to; your forbiddings work the
wrong way. Our only hope is that she will find the conditions so utterly
discouraging at the very start that she will give it up and come home.
If you are a man you will help to make them so. She has promised to stay
with that country girl with whom she contracted such an incomprehensible
friendship at Miss Jennings's.

“Oh, James, pray for grace to be a man once in your life and send her
back to us! Be a man--try to be a man! Remember the angel you killed!
Remember all we have done for you and what a return you have made, and
be a man for the first time. Try and be a man!

                         “Your unhappy sister-in-law,

                                         “MARTHA SHERWOOD.”


Mr. Fisbee read the letter with a great, rising delight which no sense
of duty could down; indeed, he perceived that his sense of duty had
ceased to conflict with the one strong hope of his life, just as he
perceived that to be a man, according to Martha Sherwood, was, in part,
to assist Martha Sherwood to have her way in things; and, for the rest,
to be the sort of man she persuaded herself she would be were she not a
woman. This he had never been able to be.

By some whimsy of fate, or by a failure of Karma (or, perhaps, by some
triumph of Kismetic retribution), James Fisbee was born in one of the
most business-like and artless cities of a practical and modern country,
of money-getting, money-saving parents, and he was born a dreamer of
the past. He grew up a student of basilican lore, of choir-screens, of
Persian frescoes, and an ardent lounger in the somewhat musty precincts
of Chaldea and Byzantium and Babylon. Early Christian Symbolism, a
dispute over the site of a Greek temple, the derivation of the lotus
column, the restoration of a Gothic buttress--these were the absorbing
questions of his youth, with now and then a lighter moment spent in
analytical consideration of the extra-mural decorations of St. Mark's.
The world buzzed along after its own fashion, not disturbing him, and
his absorptions permitted only a faint consciousness of the despair of
his relatives regarding his mind. Arrived at middle-age, and a little
more, he found himself alone in the world (though, for that matter, he
had always been alone and never of the world), and there was plenty of
money for him with various bankers who appeared to know about looking
after it. Returning to the town of his nativity after sundry expeditions
in Syria--upon which he had been accompanied by dusky gentlemen with
pickaxes and curly, long-barrelled muskets--he met, and was married by,
a lady who was ambitious, and who saw in him (probably as a fulfilment
of another Kismetic punishment) a power of learning and a destined
success. Not long after the birth of their only child, a daughter,
he was “called to fill the chair” of archaeology in a newly founded
university; one of the kind which a State and a millionaire combine to
purchase ready-made. This one was handed down off the shelf in a more or
less chaotic condition, and for a period of years betrayed considerable
doubt as to its own intentions, undecided whether they were classical
or technical; and in the settlement of that doubt lay the secret of the
past of the one man in Plattville so unhappy as to possess a past. From
that settlement and his own preceding action resulted his downfall,
his disgrace with his wife's relatives, the loss of his wife, the rage,
surprise, and anguish of her sister, Martha, and Martha's husband, Henry
Sherwood, and the separation from his little daughter, which was by
far to him the hardest to bear. For Fisbee, in his own way, and without
consulting anybody--it never occurred to him, and he was supposed often
to forget that he had a wife and child--had informally turned over to
the university all the money which the banks had kindly taken care of,
and had given it to equip an expedition which never expedited. A new
president of the institution was installed; he talked to the trustees;
they met, and elected to become modern and practical and technical; they
abolished the course in fine arts, which abolished Fisbee's connection
with them, and they then employed his money to erect a building for the
mechanical engineering department. Fisbee was left with nothing. His
wife and her kinsfolk exhibited no brilliancy in holding a totally
irresponsible man down to responsibilities, and they made a tragedy of
a not surprising fiasco. Mrs. Fisbee had lived in her ambitions, and
she died of heartbreak over the discovery of what manner of man she had
married. But, before she died, she wisely provided for her daughter.

Fisbee told Parker the story after his own queer fashion.

“You see, Mr. Parker,” he said, as they sat together in the dust and
litter of the “Herald” office, on Sunday afternoon, “you see, I admit
that my sister-in-law has always withheld her approbation from me, and
possibly her disapproval is well founded--I shall say probably. My wife
had also a considerable sum, and this she turned over to me at the time
of our marriage, though I had no wish regarding it one way or the other.
When I gave my money to the university with which I had the honor to be
connected, I added to it the fund I had received from her, as I was the
recipient of a comfortable salary as a lecturer in the institution
and had no fear of not living well, and I was greatly interested in
providing that the expedition should be perfectly equipped. Expeditions
of the magnitude of that which I had planned are expensive, I should,
perhaps, inform you, and this one was to carry on investigations
regarding several important points, very elaborately; and I am still
convinced it would have settled conclusively many vital questions
concerning the derivation of the Babylonian column, as: whether the
lotus column may be without prejudice said to--but at the present moment
I will not enter into that. I fear I had no great experience in money
matters, for the transaction had been almost entirely verbal, and
there was nothing to bind the trustees to carry out my plans for the
expedition. They were very sympathetic, but what could they do? they
begged leave to inquire. Such an institution cannot give back money once
donated, and it was clearly out of character for a school of technology
and engineering to send savants to investigate the lotus column.”

“I see,” Mr. Parker observed, genially. He listened with the most
ingratiating attention, knowing that he had a rich sensation to
set before Plattville as a dish before a king, for Fisbee's was no
confidential communication. The old man might have told a part of his
history long ago, but it had never occurred to him to talk about his
affairs--things had a habit of not occurring to Fisbee--and the efforts
of the gossips to draw him out always passed over his serene and absent
head.

“It was a blow to my wife,” the old man continued, sadly, “and I cannot
deny that her reproaches were as vehement as her disappointment was
sincere.” He hurried over this portion of his narrative with a vaguely
troubled look, but the intelligent Parker read poor Mrs. Fisbee's state
of mind between the sentences. “She never seemed to regard me in the
same light again,” the archaeologist went on. “She did not conceal
from me that she was surprised and that she could not look upon me as a
practical man; indeed, I may say, she appeared to regard me with marked
antipathy. She sent for her sister, and begged her to take our daughter
and keep her from me, as she did not consider me practical enough-I will
substitute for her more embittered expressions--to provide for a
child and instruct it in the world's ways. My sister-in-law, who was
childless, consented to adopt the little one, on the conditions that
I renounced all claim, and that the child legally assumed her name and
should be in all respects as her own daughter, and that I consented to
see her but once a year, in Rouen, at my brother-in-law's home.

“I should have refused, but I--my wife--that is--she was--very
pressing--in her last hours, and they all seemed to feel that I ought to
make amends--all except the little girl herself, I should say, for she
possessed, even as an infant, an exceptional affection for her father.
I had nothing; my salary was gone, and I was discomfited by the combined
actions of the trustees and my relatives, so--I--I gave her up to them,
and my wife passed away in a more cheerful frame of mind, I think. That
is about all. One of the instructors obtained the position here for me,
which I--I finally--lost, and I went to See the little girl every New
Year's day. This year she declared her intention of visiting _me_, but
she was persuaded by friends who were conversant with the circumstances
to stay with them, where I could be with her almost as much as at my
apartment at Mr. Tibbs's. She had long since declared her intention of
some day returning to live with me, and when she came she was strenuous
in insisting that the day had come.” The old man's voice broke suddenly
as he observed: “She has--a very--beautiful--character, Mr. Parker.”

The foreman nodded with warm confirmation. “I believe you, sir. Yes,
sir; I saw her, and I guess she looks it. You take that kind of a lady
usually, and catch her in a crowd like the one show-day, and she can't
help doing the Grand Duchess, giving the tenants a treat--but not her;
she didn't seem to _separate_ herself from 'em, some way.”

“She is a fine lady,” said the other simply. “I did not accept her
renunciation, though I acknowledge I forbade it with a very poignant
envy. I could not be the cause of her giving up for my sake her state
of ease and luxury--for my relatives are more than well-to-do, and they
made it plain she must choose between them and me, with the design, I
think, of making it more difficult to choose me. And, also, it seemed
to me, as it did to her, that she owed them nearly everything, but she
declared I had lived alone so long that she owed me everything, also.
She is a--beautiful--character, Mr. Parker.”

“Well,” said Parker, after a pause, “the town will be upside down over
this; and folks will be mighty glad to have it explained about your
being out there so much, and at the deepo, and all this and that.
Everybody in the place has been wondering what in--that is--” he
finished in some confusion--“that is--what I started to say was that
it won't be so bad as it might be, having a lady in the office here. I
don't cuss to speak of, and Ross can lay off on his till the boss comes
back. Besides, it's our only chance. If she can't make the 'Herald' hum,
we go to the wall.”

The old man did not seem to hear him. “I forbade the renunciation she
wished to make for my sake,” he said, gently, “but I accept it now for
the sake of our stricken friend--for Mr. Harkless.”

“And for the Carlow 'Herald,'” completed the foreman.

The morning following that upon which this conversation took place,
the two gentlemen stood together on the station platform, awaiting
the arrival of the express from Rouen. It was a wet gray day; the wide
country lay dripping under formless wraps of thin mist, and a warm,
drizzling rain blackened the weather-beaten shingles of the station;
made clear-reflecting puddles of the unevenly worn planks of the
platform, and dampened the packing-cases that never went anywhere too
thoroughly for occupation by the station-lounger, and ran in a little
crystal stream off Fisbee's brown cotton umbrella and down Mr. Parker's
back. The 'bus driver, Mr. Bennett, the proprietor of two attendant
“cut-unders,” and three or four other worthies whom business, or the
lack of it, called to that locality, availed themselves of the shelter
of the waiting-room, but the gentlemen of the “Herald” were too agitated
to be confined, save by the limits of the horizon. They had reached the
station half an hour before train time, and consumed the interval in
pacing the platform under the cotton umbrella, addressing each other
only in monosyllables. Those in the waiting-room gossiped eagerly, and
for the thousandth time, about the late events, and the tremendous news
concerning Fisbee. Judd Bennett looked out through the rainy doorway at
the latter with reverence and a fine pride of townsmanship, declaring
it to be his belief that Fisbee and Parker were waiting for her at
the present moment. It was a lady, and a bird of a lady, too, else why
should Cale Parker be wearing a coat, and be otherwise dooded and fixed
up beyond any wedding? Judd and his friends were somewhat excited over
Parker.

Fisbee was clad in his best shabby black, which lent an air of state to
the occasion, but Mr. Parker--Caleb Parker, whose heart, during his five
years of residence in Plattville, had been steel-proof against all the
feminine blandishments of the town, whose long, lank face had shown
beneath as long, and lanker, locks of proverbially uncombed hair, he who
had for weeks conspicuously affected a single, string-patched suspender,
who never, even upon the Sabbath day, wore a collar or blacked his
shoes--what aesthetic leaven had entered his soul that he donned not a
coat alone but also a waistcoat with checks?--and, more than _that_, a
gleaming celluloid collar?--and, more than that, a brilliant blue tie?
What had this iron youth to do with a rising excitement at train time
and brilliant blue ties?

Also, it might have been inquired if this parade of fashion had no
connection with the simultaneous action of Mr. Ross Schofield; for
Ross was at this hour engaged in decorating the battered chairs in the
“Herald” editorial room with blue satin ribbon, the purchase of which at
the Dry Goods Emporium had been directed by a sudden inspiration of his
superior of the composing force. It was Ross's intention to garnish
each chair with an elaborately tied bow, but, as he was no sailor and
understood only the intricacies of a hard-knot, he confined himself
to that species of ornamentation, leaving, however, very long ends of
ribbon hanging down after the manner of the pendants of rosettes.

It scarcely needs the statement that his labors were in honor of the new
editor-in-chief of the Carlow “Herald.” The advent and the purposes
of this personage were, as yet, known certainly to only those of the
“Herald” and to the Briscoes. It had been arranged, however, that Minnie
and her father were not to come to the station, for the journalistic
crisis was immoderately pressing; the “Herald” was to appear on the
morrow, and the new editor wished to plunge directly, and without the
briefest distraction, into the paper's difficulties, now accumulated
into a veritable sea of troubles. The editor was to be delivered to the
Briscoes at eventide and returned by them again at dewy morn; and
this was to be the daily programme. It had been further--and most
earnestly--stipulated that when the wounded proprietor of the ailing
journal should be informed of the addition to his forces, he was not
to know, or to have the slenderest hint of, the sex or identity of the
person in charge during his absence. It was inevitable that Plattville
(already gaping to the uttermost) would buzz voluminously over it before
night, but Judge Briscoe volunteered to prevent the buzz from reaching
Rouen. He undertook to interview whatever citizens should visit
Harkless, or write to him--when his illness permitted visits and
letters--and forewarn them of the incumbent's desires. To-day, the
judge stayed at home with his daughter, who trilled about the house
for happiness, and, in their place, the “Herald” deputation of two had
repaired to the station to act as a reception committee.

Far away the whistle of the express was heard, muffled to sweetness in
the damp, and the drivers, whip in hand, came out upon the platform, and
the loafers issued, also, to stand under the eaves and lean their backs
against the drier boards, preparing to eye the travellers with languid
raillery.

Mr. Parker, very nervous himself, felt the old man's elbow trembling
against his own as the great engine, reeking in the mist, and sending
great clouds of white vapor up to the sky, rushed by them, and came to a
standstill beyond the platform.

Fisbee and the foreman made haste to the nearest vestibule, and were
gazing blankly at its barred approaches when they heard a tremulous
laugh behind them and an exclamation.

“Upstairs and downstairs and in my lady's chamber! Just behind you,
dear.”

Turning quickly, Parker beheld a blushing and smiling little vision,
a vision with light-brown hair, a vision enveloped in a light-brown
rain-cloak and with brown gloves, from which the handles of a big brown
travelling bag were let fall, as the vision disappeared under the cotton
umbrella, while the smitten Judd Bennett reeled gasping against the
station.

“Dearest,” the girl cried to the old man, “you were looking for me
between the devil and deep sea--the parlor-car and the smoker. I've
given up cigars, and I've begun to study economy, so I didn't come on
either.”

There was but this one passenger for Plattville; two enormous trunks
thundered out of the baggage car onto the truck, and it was the work of
no more than a minute for Judd to hale them to the top of the omnibus
(he well wished to wear them next his heart, but their dimensions
forbade the thought), and immediately he cracked his whip and drove
off furiously through the mud to deposit his freight at the Briscoes'.
Parker, Mr. Fisbee, and the new editor-in-chief set forth, directly
after, in one of the waiting cut-unders, the foreman in front with the
driver, and holding the big brown bag on his knees in much the same
manner he would have held an alien, yet respected, infant.




CHAPTER XIV. A RESCUE

The drizzle and mist blew in under the top of the cut-under as they
drove rapidly into town, and bright little drops sparkled on the fair
hair above the new editor's forehead and on the long lashes above the
new editor's cheeks.

She shook these transient gems off lightly, as she paused in the doorway
of the office at the top of the rickety stairway. Mr. Schofield had just
added the last touch to his decorations and managed to slide into
his coat as the party came up the stairs, and now, perspiring, proud,
embarrassed, he assumed an attitude at once deprecatory of his endeavors
and pointedly expectant of commendation for the results. (He was a
modest youth and a conscious; after his first sight of her, as she stood
in the doorway, it was several days before he could lift his distressed
eyes under her glance, or, indeed, dare to avail himself of more than
a hasty and fluttering stare at her when her back was turned.) As she
entered the room, he sidled along the wall and laughed sheepishly at
nothing.

Every chair in the room was ornamented with one of his blue rosettes,
tied carefully (and firmly) to the middle slat of each chair-back. There
had been several yards of ribbon left over, and there was a hard knot
of glossy satin on each of the ink-stands and on the door-knobs; a
blue band, passing around the stovepipe, imparted an antique rakishness
suggestive of the charioteer; and a number of streamers, suspended from
a hook in the ceiling, encouraged a supposition that the employees
of the “Herald” contemplated the intricate festivities of May Day. It
needed no genius to infer that these garnitures had not embellished the
editorial chamber during Mr. Harkless's activity, but, on the contrary,
had been put in place that very morning. Mr. Fisbee had not known of
the decorations, and, as his glance fell upon them, a faint look of pain
passed over his brow; but the girl examined the room with a dancing eye,
and there were both tears and laughter in her heart.

“How beautiful!” she cried. “How beautiful!” She crossed the room and
gave her hand to Ross. “It is Mr. Schofield, isn't it? The ribbons are
delightful. I didn't know Mr. Harkless's room was so pretty.”

Ross looked out of the window and laughed as he took her hand (which he
shook with a long up and down motion), but he was set at better ease
by her apparent unrecognition of the fact that the decorations were for
her. “Oh, it ain't much, I reckon,” he replied, and continued to look
out of the window and laugh.

She went to the desk and removed her gloves and laid her rain-coat over
a chair near by. “Is this Mr. Harkless's chair?” she asked, and, Fisbee
answering that it was, she looked gravely at it for a moment, passed her
hand gently over the back of it, and then, throwing the rain-cloak over
another chair, said cheerily:

“Do you know, I think the first thing for us to do will be to dust
everything very carefully.”

“You remember I was confident she would know precisely where to begin?”
 was Fisbee's earnest whisper in the willing ear of the long foreman.
“Not an instant's indecision, was there?”

“No, siree!” replied the other; and, as he went down to the press-room
to hunt for a feather-duster which he thought might be found there,
he collared Bud Tipworthy, who, not admitted to the conclave of his
superiors, was whistling on the rainy stairway. “You hustle and find
that dust brush we used to have. Bud,” said Parker. And presently, as
they rummaged in the nooks and crannies about the machinery, he melted
to his small assistant. “The paper is saved, Buddie--saved by an angel
in light brown. You can tell it by the look of her.”

“Gee!” said Bud.

Mr. Schofield had come, blushing, to join them. “Say, Cale, did you
notice the color of her eyes?”

“Yes; they're gray.”

“I thought so, too, show day, and at Kedge Halloway's lecture; but, say,
Cale, they're kind of changeable. When she come in upstairs with you and
Fisbee, they were jest as blue!--near matched the color of our ribbons.”

“Gee!” repeated Mr. Tipworthy.

When the editorial chamber had been made so Beat that it almost
glowed--though it could never be expected to shine as did Fisbee and
Caleb Parker and Ross Schofield that morning--the editor took her seat
at the desk and looked over the few items the gentlemen had already
compiled for her perusal. Mr. Parker explained many technicalities
peculiar to the Carlow “Herald,” translated some phrases of the
printing-room, and enabled her to grasp the amount of matter needed to
fill the morrow's issue.

When Parker finished, the three incompetents sat watching the little
figure with the expression of hopeful and trusting terriers. She knit
her brow for a second--but she did not betray an instant's indecision.

“I think we should have regular market reports,” she announced,
thoughtfully. “I am sure Mr. Harkless would approve. Don't you think he
would?” She turned to Parker.

“Market reports!” Mr. Fisbee exclaimed. “I should never have thought of
market reports, nor, do I imagine, would either of my--my associates. A
woman to conceive the idea of market reports!”

The editor blushed. “Why, who would, dear, if not a woman, or a
speculator, and I'm not a speculator; and neither are you, and that's
the reason you didn't think of them. So, Mr. Parker, as there is so much
pressure, and if you don't mind continuing to act as reporter as well as
compositor until after to-morrow, and if it isn't too wet--you must take
an umbrella--would it be too much bother if you went around to all the
shops--_stores_, I mean--to all the grocers', and the butchers', and
that leather place we passed, the tannery?--and if there's one of those
places where they bring cows, would it be too much to ask you to
stop there?--and at the flour-mill, if it isn't too far?--and at the
dry-goods store? And you must take a blank-book and sharpened pencil,
And will you price everything, please, and jot down how much things
are?”

Orders received, the impetuous Parker was departing on the instant, when
she stopped him with a little cry: “But you haven't any umbrella!”
 And she forced her own, a slender wand, upon him; it bore a cunningly
wrought handle and its fabric was of glistening silk. The foreman,
unable to decline it, thanked her awkwardly, and, as she turned to
speak to Fisbee, bolted out of the door and ran down the steps without
unfolding the umbrella; and as he made for Mr. Martin's emporium, he
buttoned it securely under his long “Prince Albert,” determined that
not a drop of water should touch and ruin so delicate a thing. Thus he
carried it, triumphantly dry, through the course of his reportings of
that day.

When he had gone the editor laid her hand on Fisbee's arm. “Dear,” she
said, “do you think you would take cold if you went over to the
hotel and made a note of all the arrivals for the last week--and the
departures, too? I noticed that Mr. Harkless always filled two or
three--sticks, isn't it?--with them and things about them, and somehow
it 'read' very nicely. You must ask the landlord all about them; and, if
there aren't any, we can take up the same amount of space lamenting
the dull times, just as he used to. You see I've read the 'Herald'
faithfully; isn't it a good thing I always subscribed for it?” She
patted Fisbee's cheek, and laughed gaily into his mild, vague old eyes.

“It won't be this scramble to 'fill up' much longer. I have plans,
gentlemen,” she cried, “and before long we will print news. And we must
buy 'plate matter' instead of 'patent insides'; and I had a talk with
the Associated Press people in Rouen--but that's for afterwhile. And I
went to the hospital this morning before I left. They wouldn't let me
see him again, but they told me all about him, and he's better; and I
got Tom to go to the jail--he was so mystified, he doesn't know what I
wanted it for--and he saw some of those beasts, and I can do a column of
description besides an editorial about them, and I will be fierce enough
to suit Carlow, you may believe that. And I've been talking to Senator
Burns--that is, listening to Senator Burns, which is much stupider--and
I think I can do an article on national politics. I'm not very well up
on local issues yet, but I--” She broke off suddenly. “There! I think we
can get out to-morrow's number without any trouble. By the time you get
back from the hotel, father, I'll have half my stuff written--'written
up,' I mean. Take your big umbrella and go, dear, and please ask at the
express office if my typewriter has come.”

She laughed again with sheer delight, like a child, and ran to the
corner and got the cotton umbrella and placed it in the old man's hand.
As he reached the door, she called after him: “Wait!” and went to him
and knelt before him, and, with the humblest, proudest grace in the
world, turned up his trousers to keep them from the mud. Ross Schofield
had never considered Mr. Fisbee a particularly sacred sort of person,
but he did from that moment. The old man made some timid protest, at his
daughter's action, But she answered; “The great ladies used to buckle
the Chevalier Bayard's spurs for him, and you're a great deal nicer than
the Chev----_You haven't any rubbers_! I don't believe _any_ of you have
any rubbers!” And not until both Fisbee and Mr. Schofield had promised
to purchase overshoes at once, and in the meantime not to step in any
puddles, would she let her father depart upon his errand. He crossed
the Square with the strangest, jauntiest step ever seen in Plattville.
Solomon Tibbs had a warm argument with Miss Selina as to his identity.
Miss Selina maintaining that the figure under the big umbrella--only
the legs and coat-tails were visible to them--was that of a stranger,
probably an Englishman.

In the “Herald” office the editor turned, smiling, to the paper's
remaining vassal. “Mr. Schofield, I heard some talk in Rouen of an oil
company that had been formed to prospect for kerosene in Carlow County.
Do you know anything about it?”

Ross, surfeited with honor, terror, and possessed by a sweet distress
at finding himself tete-a-tete with the lady, looked at the wall and
replied:

“Oh, it's that Eph Watts's foolishness.”

“Do you know if they have begun to dig for it yet?”

“Ma'am?” said Ross.

“Have they begun the diggings yet?”

“No, ma'am; I think not. They've got a contrapshun fixed up about three
mile south. I don't reckon they've begun yet, hardly; they're gittin'
the machinery in place. I heard Eph say they'd begin to bore--_dig_, I
mean, ma'am, I meant to say dig----” He stopped, utterly confused
and unhappy; and she understood his manly purpose, and knew him for a
gentleman whom she liked.

“You mustn't be too much surprised,” she said; “but in spite of my
ignorance about such things, I mean to devote a good deal of space to
the oil company; it may come to be of great importance to Carlow. We
won't go into it in to-morrow's paper, beyond an item or so; but do you
think you could possibly find Mr. Watts and ask him for some information
as to their progress, and if it would be too much trouble for him to
call here some time to-morrow afternoon, or the day after? I want him to
give me an interview if he will. Tell him, please, he will very greatly
oblige us.”

“Oh, he'll come all right,” answered her companion, quickly. “I'll
take Tibbs's buggy and go down there right off. Eph won't lose no time
gittin' _here_!” And with this encouraging assurance he was flying
forth, when he, like the others, was detained by her solicitous care.
She was a born mother. He protested that in the buggy he would be
perfectly sheltered; besides, there wasn't another umbrella about the
place; he _liked_ to get wet, anyway; had always loved rain. The end
of it was that he went away in a sort of tremor, wearing her rain-cloak
over his shoulders, which garment, as it covered its owner completely
when she wore it, hung almost to his knees. He darted around a corner;
and there, breathing deeply, tenderly removed it; then, borrowing paper
and cord at a neighboring store, wrapped it neatly, and stole back to
the printing-office on the ground floor of the “Herald” building, and
left the package in charge of Bud Tipworthy, mysteriously charging him
to care for it as for his own life, and not to open it, but if the lady
so much as set one foot out of doors before his return, to hand it to
her with the message: “He borrowed another off J. Hankins.”

Left alone, the lady went to the desk and stood for a time looking
gravely at Harkless's chair. She touched it gently, as she had touched
it once before that morning, and then she spoke to it as if he were
sitting there, and as she would not have spoken, had he been sitting
there.

“You didn't want gratitude, did you?” she whispered, with sad lips.

Soon she smiled at the blue ribbons, patted the chair gaily on the back,
and, seizing upon pencil and pad, dashed into her work with rare energy.
She bent low over the desk, her pencil moving rapidly, and, except for
a momentary interruption from Mr. Tipworthy, she seemed not to pause for
breath; certainly her pencil did not. She had covered many sheets when
her father returned; and, as he came in softly, not to disturb her, she
was so deeply engrossed she did not hear him; nor did she look up when
Parker entered, but pursued the formulation of her fast-flying ideas
with the same single purpose and abandon; so the two men sat and waited
while their chieftainess wrote absorbedly. At last she glanced up and
made a little startled exclamation at seeing them there, and then gave
them cheery greeting. Each placed several scribbled sheets before
her, and she, having first assured herself that Fisbee had bought his
overshoes, and having expressed a fear that Mr. Parker had found her
umbrella too small, as he looked damp (and indeed he _was_ damp), cried
praises on their notes and offered the reporters great applause.

“It is all so splendid!” she cried. “How could you do it so quickly? And
in the rain, too! This is exactly what we need. I've done most of
the things I mentioned, I think, and made a draught of some plans for
hereafter. And about that man's coming out for Congress, I must tell you
it is my greatest hope that he will. We can let it go until he does, and
then----But doesn't it seem to you that it would be a good notion for
the 'Herald' to have a woman's page--'For Feminine Readers,' or, 'Of
Interest to Women'--once a week?”

“A woman's page!” exclaimed Fisbee. “I could never have thought of that,
could you, Mr. Parker?”

“And now,” she continued, “I think that when I've gone over what I've
written and beat it into better shape I shall be ready for something to
eat. Isn't it almost time for luncheon?”

This simple, and surely natural, inquiry had a singular, devastating
effect upon her hearers. They looked upon each other with fallen jaws
and complete stupefaction. The old man began to grow pale, and Parker
glared about him with a wild eye. Fortunately, the editor was too busy
at her work to notice their agitation; she applied herself to making
alterations here and there, sometimes frowningly crossing out whole
lines and even paragraphs, sometimes smiling and beaming at the writing;
and, as she bent earnestly over the paper, against the darkness of the
rainy day, the glamour about her fair hair was like a light in the
room. To the minds of her two companions, this lustre was a gentle but
unbearable accusation; and each dreaded the moment when her Work
should be finished, with a great dread. There was a small “store-room”
 adjoining the office, and presently Mr. Parker, sweating at the brow,
walked in there. The old man gave him a look of despairing reproach, but
in a moment the foreman's voice was heard: “Oh, Mr. Fisbee, can you step
here a second?”

“Yes, indeed!” was Fisbee's reply; and he fled guiltily into the
“store-room,” and Parker closed the door. They stood knee-deep in the
clutter and lumber, facing each other abjectly.

“Well, we're both done, anyway, Mr. Fisbee,” remarked the foreman.

“Indubitably, Mr. Parker,” the old man answered; “it is too true.”

“Never to think a blame thing about dinner for her!” Parker continued,
remorsefully. “And her a lady that can turn off copy like a rotary
snowplough in a Dakota blizzard! Did you see the sheets she's piled up
on that desk?”

“There is no cafe--nothing--in Plattville, that could prepare food
worthy of her,” groaned Fisbee. “Nothing!”

“And we never thought of it. Never made a single arrangement. Never
struck us she didn't live on keeping us dry and being good, I guess.”

“How can I go there and tell her that?”

“Lord!”

“She cannot go to the hotel----”

“Well, I guess not! It ain't fit for her. Lum's table is hard enough
on a strong man. Landis doesn't know a good cake from a Fiji missionary
pudding. I don't expect pie is much her style, and, besides, the Palace
Hotel pies--well!--the boss was a mighty uncomplaining man, but I
used to notice his articles on field drainage got kind of sour and
low-spirited when they'd been having more than the regular allowance of
pie for dinner. She can't go there anyway; it's no use; it's after two
o'clock, and the dining-room shuts off at one. I wonder what kind of
cake she likes best.”

“I don't know,” said the perplexed Fisbee. “If we ask her--”

“If we could sort of get it out of her diplomatically, we could
telegraph to Rouen for a good one.”

“Ha!” said the other, brightening up. “You try it, Mr. Parker. I fear I
have not much skill in diplomacy, but if you----”

The compositor's mouth drooped at the corners, and he interrupted
gloomily: “But it wouldn't get here till to-morrow.”

“True; it would not.”

They fell into a despondent reverie, with their chins in their bosoms.
There came a cheerful voice from the next room, but to them it brought
no cheer; in their ears it sounded weak from the need of food and faint
with piteous reproach.

“Father, aren't you coming to have luncheon with me?”

“Mr. Parker, what are we to do?” whispered the old man, hoarsely.

“Is it too far to take her to Briscoes'?”

“In the rain?”

“Take her with you to Tibbs's.”

“Their noon meal is long since over; and their larder is not--is
not--extensive.”

“Father!” called the girl. She was stirring; they could hear her moving
about the room.

“You've got to go in and tell her,” said the foreman, desperately, and
together they stumbled into the room. A small table at one end of it was
laid with a snowy cloth and there was a fragrance of tea, and, amidst
various dainties, one caught a glimpse of cold chicken and lettuce
leaves. Fisbee stopped, dumfounded, but the foreman, after stammeringly
declining an invitation to partake, alleging that his own meal awaited,
sped down to the printing-room, and seized upon Bud Tipworthy with a
heavy hand.

“Where did all that come from, up there?”

“Leave go me! _What_ 'all that'?”

“All that tea and chicken and salad and wafers--all kinds of things;
sardines, for all I know!”

“They come in Briscoes' buckboard while you was gone. Briscoes sent 'em
in a basket; I took 'em up and she set the basket under the table. You'd
seen it if you'd 'a' looked. _Quit_ that!” And it was unjust to cuff the
perfectly innocent and mystified Bud, and worse not to tell him what the
punishment was for.

Before the day was over, system had been introduced, and the “Herald”
 was running on it: and all that warm, rainy afternoon, the editor and
Fisbee worked in the editorial rooms, Parker and Bud and Mr. Schofield
(after his return with the items and a courteous message from Ephraim
Watts) bent over the forms downstairs, and Uncle Xenophon was cleaning
the store-room and scrubbing the floor.

An extraordinary number of errands took the various members of the
printing force up to see the editor-in-chief, literally to see the
editor-in-chief; it was hard to believe that the presence had not
flown--hard to keep believing, without the repeated testimony of sight,
that the dingy room upstairs was actually the setting for their jewel;
and a jewel they swore she was. The printers came down chuckling and
gurgling after each interview; it was partly the thought that she
belonged to the “Herald,” _their_ paper. Once Ross, as he cut down one
of the temporarily distended advertisements, looked up and caught the
foreman giggling to himself.

“What in the name of common-sense you laughin' at, Cale?” he asked.

“What are _you_ laughing at?” rejoined the other.

“I dunno!”

The day wore on, wet and dreary outside, but all within the “Herald's”
 bosom was snug and busy and murmurous with the healthy thrum of life
and prosperity renewed. Toward six o'clock, system accomplished, the new
guiding-spirit was deliberating on a policy as Harkless would conceive
a policy, were he there, when Minnie Briscoe ran joyously up the stairs,
plunged into the room, waterproofed and radiant, and caught her friend
in her eager arms, and put an end to policy for that day.

But policy and labor did not end at twilight every day; there were
evenings, as in the time of Harkless, when lamps shone from the upper
windows of the “Herald” building. For the little editor worked hard,
and sometimes she worked late; she always worked early. She made some
mistakes at first, and one or two blunders which she took more seriously
than any one else did. But she found a remedy for all such results of
her inexperience, and she developed experience. She set at her task with
the energy of her youthfulness and no limit to her ambition, and she
felt that Harkless had prepared the way for a wide expansion of the
paper's interests; wider than he knew. She had a belief that there were
possibilities for a country newspaper, and she brought a fresh point of
view to operate in a situation where Harkless had fallen, perhaps, too
much in the rut; and she watched every chance with a keen eye and looked
ahead of her with clear foresight. What she waited and yearned for and
dreaded, was the time when a copy of the new “Herald” should be placed
in the trembling hands of the man who lay in the Rouen hospital. Then,
she felt, if he, unaware of her identity, should place everything in her
hands unreservedly, that would be a tribute to her work--and how hard
she would labor to deserve it! After a time, she began to realize that,
as his representative and the editor of the “Herald,” she had become
a factor in district politics. It took her breath--but with a gasp of
delight, for there was something she wanted to do.

Above all, she brought a light heart to her work. One evening in the
latter part of that first week of the new regime, Parker perceived Bud
Tipworthy standing in the doorway of the printing-room, beckoning him
silently to come without.

“What's the matter, Buddie?”

“Listen. She's singin' over her work.”

Parker stepped outside. On the pavement, people had stopped to listen;
they stood in the shadow, looking up with parted lips at the open,
lighted Windows, whence came a clear, soft, reaching voice, lifted in
song; now it swelled louder, unconsciously; now its volume was more
slender and it melted liquidly into the night; again, it trembled and
rose and dwelt in the ear, strong and pure; and, hearing it, you sighed
with unknown longings. It was the “Angels' Serenade.”

Bud Tipworthy's sister, Cynthia, was with him, and Parker saw that she
turned from the window and that she was crying, quietly; she put her
hand on the boy's shoulder and patted it with a forlorn gesture which,
to the foreman's eye, was as graceful as it was sad. He moved closer to
Bud and his big hand fell on Cynthia's brother's other shoulder, as he
realized that red hair could look pretty sometimes; and he wondered why
the editor's singing made Cynthy cry; and at the same time he decided
to be mighty good to Bud henceforth. The spell of night and song was
on him; that and something more; for it is a strange, inexplicable
fact that the most practical chief ever known to the “Herald” had a
singularly sentimental influence over her subordinates, from the moment
of her arrival. Under Harkless's domination there had been no more
steadfast bachelors in Carlow than Ross Schofield and Caleb Parker, and,
like timorous youths in a graveyard, daring and mocking the ghosts in
order to assuage their own fears, they had so jibed and jeered at the
married state that there was talk of urging the minister to preach at
them; but now let it be recorded that at the moment Caleb laid his hand
on Bud's other shoulder, his associate, Mr. Schofield, was enjoying a
walk in the far end of town with a widow, and it is not to be doubted
that Mr. Tipworthy's heart, also, was no longer in his possession,
though, as it was after eight o'clock, the damsel of his desire had
probably long since retired to her couch.

For some faint light on the cause of these spells, we must turn to a
comment made by the invaluable Mr. Martin some time afterward. Referring
to the lady to whose voice he was now listening in silence (which shows
how great the enthralling of her voice was), he said: “When you saw her,
or heard her, or managed to be around, any, where she was, why, if
you couldn't git up no hope of marryin' _her_, you wanted to marry
_somebody_.”

Mr. Lige Willetts, riding idly by, drew rein in front of the lighted
windows, and listened with the others. Presently he leaned from his
horse and whispered to a man near him:

“I know that song.”

“Do you?” whispered the other.

“Yes; he and I heard her sing it, the night he was shot.”

“So!”

“Yes, sir. It's by Beethoven.”

“Is it?”

“It's a seraphic song,” continued Lige.

“No!” exclaimed his friend; then, shaking his head, he sighed: “Well,
it's mighty sweet.”

The song was suddenly woven into laughter in the unseen chamber, and the
lights in the windows went out, and a small lady and a tall lady and
a thin old man, all three laughing and talking happily, came down and
drove off in the Briscoe buckboard. The little crowd dispersed quietly;
Lige Willetts plucked to his horse and cantered away to overtake the
buckboard; William Todd took his courage between his teeth, and, the
song ringing in his ears, made a desperate resolve to call upon Miss
Bardlock that evening, in spite of its being a week day, and Caleb
Parker gently and stammeringly asked Cynthia if she would wait till he
shut up the shop, and let him walk home with her and Bud.

Soon the Square was quiet as before, and there was naught but peace
under the big stars of July.

That day the news had come that Harkless, after weeks of alternate
improvement and relapse, hazardously lingering in the borderland of
shadows, had passed the crucial point and was convalescent. His recovery
was assured. But from their first word of him, from the message that he
was found and was alive, none of the people of Carlow had really doubted
it. They are simple country people, and they know that God is good.




CHAPTER XV. NETTLES

Two men who have been comrades and classmates at the Alma Mater of John
Harkless and Tom Meredith; two who have belonged to the same dub and
roomed in the same entry; who have pooled their clothes and money in
a common stock for either to draw on; who have shared the fortunes
of athletic war, triumphing together, sometimes with an intense
triumphancy; two men who were once boys getting hazed together, hazing
in no unkindly fashion in their turn, always helping each other to stuff
brains the night before an examination and to blow away the suffocating
statistics like foam the night after; singing, wrestling, dancing,
laughing, succeeding together, through the four kindest years of life;
two such brave companions, meeting in the after years, are touchingly
tender and caressive of each other, but the tenderness takes the shy,
United States form of insulting epithets, and the caresses are blows. If
John Harkless had been in health, uninjured and prosperous, Tom Meredith
could no more have thrown himself on his knees beside him and called him
“old friend” than he could have danced on the slack-wire.

One day they thought the patient sleeping; the nurse fanned him softly,
and Meredith had stolen in and was sitting by the cot. One of Harkless's
eyes had been freed of the bandage, and, when Tom came in, it was
closed; but, by and by, Meredith became aware that the unbandaged eye
had opened and that it was suffused with a pathetic moisture; yet it
twinkled with a comprehending light, and John knew that it was his old
Tom Meredith who was sitting beside him, with the air of having sat
there very often before. But this bald, middle-aged young man, not
without elegance, yet a prosperous burgher for all that--was _this_ the
slim, rollicking broth of a boy whose thick auburn hair used to make one
streak of flame as he spun around the bases on a home run? Without doubt
it was the stupendous fact, wrought by the alchemy of seven years.

For, though seven years be a mere breath in the memories of the old, it
is a long transfiguration to him whose first youth is passing, and who
finds unsolicited additions accruing to some parts of his being and
strange deprivations in others, and upon whom the unhappy realization
begins to be borne in, that his is no particular case, and that he
of all the world is not to be spared, but, like his forbears, must
inevitably wriggle in the disguising crucible of time. And, though men
accept it with apparently patient humor, the first realization that
people do grow old, and that they do it before they have had time to be
young, is apt to come like a shock.

Perhaps not even in the interminable months of Carlow had Harkless
realized the length of seven years so keenly as he did when he beheld
his old friend at his bedside. How men may be warped apart in seven
years, especially in the seven years between twenty-three and thirty! At
the latter age you may return to the inseparable of seven years before
and speak not the same language; you find no heartiness to carry on with
each other after half an hour. Not so these classmates, who had known
each other to the bone.

Ah, yes, it was Tom Meredith, the same lad, in spite of his masquerade
of flesh; and Helen was right: Tom had not forgotten.

“It's the old horse-thief!” John murmured, tremulously.

“You go plumb to thunder,” answered Meredith between gulps.


When he was well enough, they had long talks; and at other times
Harkless lay by the window, and breathed deep of the fresh air, while
Meredith attended to his correspondence for him, and read the papers
to him. But there was one phenomenon of literature the convalescent
insisted upon observing for himself, and which he went over again and
again, to the detriment of his single unswathed eye, and this was the
Carlow “Herald.”

The first letter he had read to him was one from Fisbee stating that the
crippled forces left in charge had found themselves almost distraught in
their efforts to carry on the paper (as their chief might conclude for
himself on perusal of the issues of the first fortnight of his absence),
and they had made bold to avail themselves of the services of a young
relative of the writer's from a distant city--a capable journalist,
who had no other employment for the present, and who had accepted the
responsibilities of the “Herald” temporarily. There followed a note from
Parker, announcing that Mr. Fisbee's relative was a bird, and was the
kind to make the “Herald” hum. They hoped Mr. Harkless would approve
of their bespeaking the new hand on the sheet; the paper must have
suspended otherwise. Harkless, almost overcome by his surprise that
Fisbee possessed a relative, dictated a hearty and grateful indorsement
of their action, and, soon after, received a typewritten rejoinder,
somewhat complicated in the reading, because of the numerous type
errors and their corrections. The missive was signed “H. Fisbee,” in
a strapping masculine hand that suggested six feet of enterprise and
muscle spattering ink on its shirt sleeves.

John groaned and fretted over the writhings of the “Herald's” headless
fortnight, but, perusing the issues produced under the domination of H.
Fisbee, he started now and then, and chuckled at some shrewd felicities
of management, or stared, puzzled, over an oddity, but came to a feeling
of vast relief; and, when the question of H. Fisbee's salary was settled
and the tenancy assured, he sank into a repose of mind. H. Fisbee might
be an eccentric fellow, but he knew his business, and, apparently,
he knew something of other business as well, for he wrote at length
concerning the Carlow oil fields, urging Harkless to take shares in Mr.
Watts's company while the stock was very low, two wells having been
sunk without satisfactory results. H. Fisbee explained with exceeding
technicality his reasons for believing that the third well would strike
oil.

But with his ease of mind regarding the “Herald,” Harkless found himself
possessed by apathy. He fretted no longer to get back to Plattville.
With the prospect of return it seemed an emptiness glared at him from
hollow sockets, and the thought of the dreary routine he must follow
when he went back gave him the same faint nausea he had felt the evening
after the circus. And, though it was partly the long sweat of anguish
which had benumbed him, his apathy was pierced, at times, by a bodily
horror of the scene of his struggle. At night he faced the grotesque
masks of the Cross-Roads men and the brutal odds again; over and over
he felt the blows, and clapped his hand to where the close fire of Bob
Skillett's pistol burned his body.

And, except for the release from pain, he rejoiced less and less in
his recovery. He remembered a tedious sickness of his childhood and
how beautiful he had thought the world, when he began to get well, how
electric the open air blowing in at the window, how green the smile of
earth, and how glorious to live and see the open day again. He had none
of that feeling now. No pretty vision came again near his bed, and he
beheld his convalescence as a mistake. He had come to a jumping-off
place in his life--why had they not let him jump? What was there left
but the weary plod, plod, and dust of years?

He could have gone back to Carlow in better spirit if it had not been
for the few dazzling hours of companionship which had transformed it to
a paradise, but, gone, left a desert. She, by the sight of her, had made
him wish to live, and now, that he saw her no more, she made him wish
to die. How little she had cared for him, since she told him she did
not care, when he had not meant to ask her. He was weary, and at last he
longed to find the line of least resistance and follow it; he had done
hard things for a long time, but now he wanted to do something easy.
Under the new genius--who was already urging that the paper should
be made a daily--the “Herald” could get along without him; and the
“White-Caps” would bother Carlow no longer; and he thought that Kedge
Halloway, an honest man, if a dull one, was sure to be renominated for
Congress at the district convention which was to meet at Plattville in
September--these were his responsibilities, and they did not fret him.
Everything was all right. There was only one thought which thrilled him:
his impression that she had come to the hospital to see him was not a
delusion; she had really been there--as a humane, Christian person,
he said to himself. One day he told Meredith of his vision, and Tom
explained that it was no conjuration of fever.

“But I thought she'd gone abroad,” said Harkless, staring.

“They had planned to,” answered his friend. “They gave it up for some
reason. Uncle Henry decided that he wasn't strong enough for the trip,
or something.”

“Then--is she--is she here?”

“No; Helen is never here in summer. When she came back from Plattville,
she went north, somewhere, to join people she had promised, I think.”
 Meredith had as yet no inkling or suspicion that his adopted cousin had
returned to Plattville. What he told Harkless was what his aunt had told
him, and he accepted it as the truth.

Mrs. Sherwood (for she was both Mr. and Mrs. Sherwood) had always
considered Fisbee an enigmatic rascal, and she regarded Helen's
defection to him in the light of a family scandal to be hushed up, as
well as a scalding pain to be borne. Some day the unkind girl-errant
would “return to her wisdom and her duty”; meanwhile, the less known
about it the better.

Meredith talked very little to Harkless of his cousin, beyond lightly
commenting on the pleasure and oddity of their meeting, and telling
him of her friendly anxiety about his recovery; he said she had perfect
confidence from the first that he would recover. Harkless had said a
word or two in his delirium and a word or two out of it, and these,
with once a sudden brow of suffering, and a difference Meredith felt in
Helen's manner when they stood together by the sick man's bedside, had
given the young man a strong impression, partly intuitive, that in spite
of the short time the two had known each other, something had happened
between them at Plattville, and he ventured a guess which was not far
from the truth. Altogether, the thing was fairly plain--a sad lover
is not so hard to read--and Meredith was sorry, for they were the two
people he liked best on earth.

The young man carried his gay presence daily to the hospital, where
Harkless now lay in a pleasant room of his own, and he tried to keep
his friend cheery, which was an easy matter on the surface, for the
journalist turned ever a mask of jokes upon him; but it was not hard
for one who liked him as Meredith did to see through to the melancholy
underneath. After his one reference to Helen, John was entirely silent
of her, and Meredith came to feel that both would be embarrassed if
occasion should rise and even her name again be mentioned between them.

He did not speak of his family connection with Mr. Fisbee to the
invalid, for, although the connection was distant, the old man was, in a
way, the family skeleton, and Meredith had a strong sense of the decency
of reserve in such a matter. There was one thing Fisbee's shame had made
the old man unable not to suppress when he told Parker his story; the
wraith of a torrid palate had pursued him from his youth, and the days
of drink and despair from which Harkless had saved him were not the
first in his life. Meredith wondered as much as did Harkless where
Fisbee had picked up the journalistic “young relative” who signed his
extremely business-like missives in such a thundering hand. It was
evident that the old man was grateful to his patron, but it did not
occur to Meredith that Fisbee's daughter might have an even stronger
sense of gratitude, one so strong that she could give all her young
strength to work for the man who had been good to her father.

There came a day in August when Meredith took the convalescent from the
hospital in a victoria, and installed him in his own home. Harkless's
clothes hung on his big frame limply; however, there was a drift of
light in his eyes as they drove slowly through the pretty streets of
Rouen. The bandages and splints and drugs and swathings were all gone
now, and his sole task was to gather strength. The thin face was sallow
no longer; it was the color of evening shadows; indeed he lay among the
cushions seemingly no more than a gaunt shadow of the late afternoon,
looking old and gray and weary. They rolled along abusing each other,
John sometimes gratefully threatening his friend with violence.

The victoria passed a stone house with wide lawns and an inhospitable
air of wealth and importunate rank; over the sward two peacocks swung,
ambulating like caravals in a green sea; and one expected a fine lady to
come smiling and glittering from the door. Oddly enough, though he
had never seen the place before, it struck Harkless with a sense of
familiarity. “Who lives there?” he asked abruptly.

“Who lives there? On the left? Why that--that is the Sherwood place,”
 Meredith answered, in a tone which sounded as if he were not quite sure
of it, but inclined to think his information correct. Harkless relapsed
into silence.

Meredith's home was a few blocks further up the same street; a capacious
house in the Western fashion of the Seventies. In front, on the lawn,
there was a fountain with a leaping play of water; maples and shrubbery
were everywhere; and here and there stood a stiff sentinel of Lombardy
poplar. It was all cool and incongruous and comfortable; and, on the
porch, sheltered from publicity by a multitude of palms and flowering
plants, a white-jacketed negro appeared with a noble smile and a more
important tray, whereon tinkled bedewed glasses and a crystal pitcher,
against whose sides the ice clinked sweetly. There was a complement of
straws.

When they had helped him to an easy chair on the porch, Harkless
whistled luxuriously. “Ah, my bachelor!” he exclaimed, as he selected a
straw.

“'Who would fardels bear?'” rejoined Mr. Meredith. Then came to the
other a recollection of an auburn-haired ball player on whom the third
strike had once been called while his eyes wandered tenderly to the
grandstand, where the prettiest girl of that commencement week was
sitting.

“Have you forgot the 'Indian Princess'?” he asked.

“You're a dull old person,” Tom laughed. “Haven't you discovered that
'tis they who forget us? And why shouldn't they? Do _we_ remember
well?--anybody except just us two, I mean, of course.”

“I've a notion we do, sometimes.”

The other set his glass on the tray, and lit his cigarette. “Yes; when
we're unsuccessful. Then I think we do.”

“That may be true.”

“Of course it is. If a lady wishes to make an impression on me that is
worth making, let her let me make none on her.”

“You think it is always our vanity?”

“Analyze it as your revered Thomas does and you shall reach the same
conclusion. Let a girl reject you and--” Meredith broke off, cursing
himself inwardly, and, rising, cried gaily: “What profiteth it a man
if he gain the whole wisdom in regard to women and loseth not his own
heart? And neither of us is lacking a heart--though it may be; one can't
tell, one's self; one has to find out about that from some girl. At
least, I'm rather sure of mine; it's difficult to give a tobacco-heart
away; it's drugged on the market. I'm going to bring out the dogs; I'm
spending the summer at home just to give them daily exercise.”

This explanation of his continued presence in Rouen struck John as
quite as plausible as Meredith's more seriously alleged reasons for not
joining his mother and sister, at Winter Harbor. (He possessed a mother,
and, as he explained, he had also sisters to satiety, in point of
numbers.) Harkless knew that Tom had stayed to look after him; and he
thought there never was so poor a peg as himself whereon to hang
the warm mantle of such a friendship. He knew that other mantles of
affection and kindliness hung on that self-same peg, for he had been
moved by the letters and visits from Carlow people, and he had heard
the story of their descent upon the hospital, and of the march on the
Cross-Roads. Many a good fellow, too, had come to see him during his
better days--from Judge Briscoe, openly tender and solicitous, to the
embarrassed William Todd, who fiddled at his hat and explained that,
being as he was in town on business (a palpable fiction) he thought he'd
look in to see if “they was any word would wish to be sent down to our
city.” The good will the sick man had from every one touched him, and
made him feel unworthy, and he could see nothing he had done to deserve
it. Mr. Meredith could (and would not--openly, at least) have explained
to him that it made not a great deal of difference what he did; it was
what people thought he was.

His host helped him upstairs after dinner, and showed him the room
prepared for his occupancy. Harkless sank, sighing with weakness, into a
deep chair, and Meredith went to a window-seat and stretched himself out
for a smoke and chat.

“Doesn't it beat your time,” he said, cheerily, “to think of what's
become of all the old boys? They turn up so differently from what we
expected, when they turn up at all. We sized them up all right so far
as character goes, I fancy, but we couldn't size up the chances of
life. Take poor old Pickle Haines: who'd have dreamed Pickle would shoot
himself over a bankruptcy? I dare say that wasn't all of it--might have
been cherchez la femme, don't you think? What do you make of Pickle's
case, John?”

There was no answer. Harkless's chair was directly in front of the
mantel-piece, and upon the carved wooden shelf, amongst tobacco-jars
and little curios, cotillion favors and the like, there were scattered
a number of photographs. One of these was that of a girl who looked
straight out at you from a filigree frame; there was hardly a corner
of the room where you could have stood without her clear, serious eyes
seeming to rest upon yours.

“Cherchez la femme?” repeated Tom, puffing unconsciously. “Pickle was
a good fellow, but he had the deuce of an eye for a girl. Do you
remember--” He stopped short, and saw the man and the photograph looking
at each other. Too late, he unhappily remembered that he had meant, and
forgotten, to take that photograph out of the room before he brought
Harkless in. Now he would have to leave it; and Helen Sherwood was not
the sort of girl, even in a flat presentment, to be continually thrown
in the face of a man who had lost her. And it always went hard, Tom
reflected, with men who stretched vain hands to Helen, only to lose her.
But there was one, he thought, whose outstretched hands might not prove
so vain. Why couldn't she have cared for John Harkless? Deuce take
the girl, did she want to marry an emperor? He looked at Harkless, and
pitied him with an almost tearful compassion. A feverish color dwelt in
the convalescent's cheek; the apathy that had dulled his eyes was there
no longer; instead, they burned with a steady fire. The image returned
his unwavering gaze with inscrutable kindness.

“You heard that Pickle shot himself, didn't you?” Meredith asked. There
was no answer; John did not hear him.

“Do you know that poor Jeny Haines killed himself, last March?” Tom said
sharply.

There was only silence in the room. Meredith got up and rattled some
tongs in the empty fireplace, but the other did not move or notice him
in any way.

Meredith set the tongs down, and went quietly out of the room, leaving
his friend to that mysterious interview.

When he came back, after a remorseful cigarette in the yard, Harkless
was still sitting, motionless, looking up at the photograph above the
mantel-piece.



They drove abroad every day, at first in the victoria, and, as
Harkless's strength began to come back, in a knock-about cart of Tom's,
a light trail of blue smoke floating back wherever the two friends
passed. And though the country editor grew stronger in the pleasant,
open city, Meredith felt that his apathy and listlessness only deepened,
and he suspected that, in Harkless's own room, where the photograph
reigned, the languor departed for the time, making way for a destructive
fire. Judge Briscoe, paying a second visit to Rouen, told Tom, in an
aside, that their friend did not seem to be the same man. He was altered
and aged beyond belief, the old gentleman whispered sadly.

Meredith decided that his guest needed enlivening--something to take him
out of himself; he must be stirred up to rub against people once more.
And therefore, one night he made a little company for him: two or three
apparently betrothed very young couples, for whom it was rather dull,
after they had looked their fill of Harkless (it appeared that every one
was curious to see him); and three or four married young couples, for
whom the entertainment seemed rather diverting in an absent-minded way
(they had the air of remembering that they had forgotten the baby); and
three or four bachelors, who seemed contented in any place where they
were allowed to smoke; and one widower, whose manner indicated that any
occasion whatever was gay enough for him; and four or five young women,
who (Meredith explained to John) were of their host's age, and had been
“left over” out of the set he grew up with; and for these the modest
party took on a hilarious and chipper character. “It is these girls that
have let the men go by because they didn't see any good enough; they're
the jolly souls!” the one widower remarked, confidentially. “They've
been at it a long while, and they know how, and they're light-hearted as
robins. They have more fun than people who have responsibilities.”

All of these lively demoiselles fluttered about Harkless with
commiserative pleasantries, and, in spite of his protestations, made
him recline in the biggest and deepest chair on the porch, where they
surfeited him with kindness and grouped about him with extra cushions
and tenderness for a man who had been injured. No one mentioned the fact
that he had been hurt; it was not spoken of, though they wished mightily
he would tell them the story they had read luridly in the public prints.
They were very good to him. One of them, in particular, a handsome,
dark, kind-eyed girl, constituted herself at once his cicerone in Rouen
gossip and his waiting-maid. She sat by him, and saw that his needs (and
his not-needs, too) were supplied and oversupplied; she could not let
him move, and anticipated his least wish, though he was now amply able
to help himself; and she fanned him as if he were a dying consumptive.

They sat on Meredith's big porch in the late twilight and ate a
substantial refection, and when this was finished, a buzz of nonsense
rose from all quarters, except the remote corners where the youthful
affianced ones had defensively stationed themselves behind a rampart of
plants. They, having eaten, had naught to do, and were only waiting
a decent hour for departure. Laughing voices passed up and down the
street, and mingled with the rhythmic plashing of Meredith's fountain,
and, beyond the shrubberies and fence, one caught glimpses of the light
dresses of women moving to and fro, and of people sitting bareheaded on
neighboring lawns to enjoy the twilight. Now and then would pass, with
pipe and dog, the beflanneled figure of an undergraduate, home for
vacation, or a trio of youths in knickerbockers, or a band of young
girls, or both trio and band together; and from a cross street, near by,
came the calls and laughter of romping children and the pulsating
whirr of a lawn-mower: This sound Harkless remarked as a ceaseless
accompaniment to life in Rouen; even in the middle of the night there
was always some unfortunate, cutting grass.

When the daylight was all gone, and the stars had crept out, strolling
negroes patrolled the sidewalks, thrumming mandolins and guitars, and
others came and went, singing, making the night Venetian. The untrained,
joyous voices, chording eerily in their sweet, racial minors, came on
the air, sometimes from far away. But there swung out a chorus from
fresh, Aryan throats, in the house south of Meredith's:

        “Where, oh where, are the grave old Seniors?
         Safe, now, in the wide, wide world!”

“Doesn't that thrill you, boy?” said Meredith, joining the group about
Harkless's chair. “Those fellows are Sophomores, class of heaven knows
what. _Aren't_ you feeling a fossil. Father Abraham?”

A banjo chattered on the lawn to the north, and soon a mixed chorus of
girls and boys sang from there:

       “O, 'Arriet, I'm waiting, waiting alone out 'ere.”

Then a piano across the street sounded the dearthful harmonies of
Chopin's Funeral March.

“You may take your choice,” remarked Meredith, flicking a spark over the
rail in the ash of his cigar, “Chopping or Chevalier.”

“Chopin, my friend,” said the lady who had attached herself to
Harkless. She tapped Tom's shoulder with her fan and smiled, graciously
corrective.

“Thank you, Miss Hinsdale,” he answered, gratefully. “And as I, perhaps,
had better say, since otherwise there might be a pause and I am the
host, we have a wide selection. In addition to what is provided at
present, I predict that within the next ten minutes a talented girl who
lives two doors south will favor us with the Pilgrims' Chorus, piano
arrangement, break down in the middle, and drift, into 'Rastus on
Parade,' while a double quartette of middle-aged colored gentlemen under
our Jim will make choral offering in our own back yard.”

“My dear Tom,” exclaimed Miss Hinsdale, “you forget Wetherford Swift!”

“I could stand it all,” put forth the widower, “if it were not for
Wetherford Swift.”

“When is Miss Sherwood coming home?” asked one of the ladies. “Why does
she stay away and leave him to his sufferings?”

“Us to his sufferings,” substituted a bachelor. “He is just beginning;
listen.”

Through all the other sounds of music, there penetrated from an unseen
source, a sawish, scraped, vibration of catgut, pathetic, insistent,
painstaking, and painful beyond belief.

“He is in a terrible way to-night,” said the widower.

Miss Hinsdale laughed. “Worse every night. The violinist is young
Wetherford Swift,” she explained to Harkless. “He is very much in love,
and it doesn't agree with him. He used to be such a pleasant boy,
but last winter he went quite mad over Helen Sherwood, Mr. Meredith's
cousin, our beauty, you know--I am so sorry she isn't here; you'd be
interested in meeting her, I'm sure--and he took up the violin.”

“It is said that his family took up chloroform at the same time,” said
the widower.

“His music is a barometer,” continued the lady, “and by it the
neighborhood nightly observes whether Miss Sherwood has been nice to him
or not.”

“It is always exceedingly plaintive,” explained another.

“Except once,” rejoined Miss Hinsdale. “He played jigs when she came
home from somewhere or other, in June.”

“It was Tosti's 'Let Me Die,' the very next evening,” remarked the
widower.

“Ah,” said one of the bachelors, “but his joy was sadder for us than his
misery. Hear him now.”

“I think he means it for 'What's this dull town to me,'” observed
another, with some rancor. “I would willingly make the town sufficiently
exciting for him--”

“If there were not an ordinance against the hurling of missiles,”
 finished the widower.

The piano executing the funeral march ceased to execute, discomfited by
the persistent and overpowering violin; the banjo and the coster-songs
were given over; even the collegians' music was defeated; and the
neighborhood was forced to listen to the dauntless fiddle, but not
without protest, for there came an indignant, spoken chorus from the
quarter whence the college songs had issued: “Ya-a-ay! Wetherford, put
it away! _She'll_ come back!” The violin played on.

“We all know each other here, you see, Mr. Harkless,” Miss Hinsdale
smiled benignantly.

“They didn't bother Mr. Wetherford Swift,” said the widower. “Not that
time. Do you hear him?--'Could ye come back to me, Douglas'?”

“Oh, but it isn't absence that is killing him and his friends,” cried
one of the young women. “It is Brainard Macauley.”

“That is a mistake,” said Tom Meredith, as easily as he could. “There
goes Jim's double quartette. Listen, and you will hear them try to----”

But the lady who had mentioned Brainard Macauley cried indignantly: “You
try to change the subject the moment it threatens to be interesting.
They were together everywhere until the day she went away; they danced
and 'sat out' together through the whole of one country-club party;
they drove every afternoon; they took long walks, and he was at the
Sherwoods' every evening of her last week in town. 'That is a mistake!'”

“I'm afraid it looks rather bleak for Wetherford,” said the widower. “I
went up to the 'Journal' office on business, one day, and there sat Miss
Sherwood in Macauley's inner temple, chatting with a reporter, while
Brainard finished some work.”

“Helen is eccentric,” said the former speaker, “but she's not quite that
eccentric, unless they were engaged. It is well understood that they
will announce it in the fall.”

Miss Hinsdale kindly explained to Harkless that Brainard Macauley was
the editor of the “Rouen Morning Journal”--“a very distinguished young
man, not over twenty-eight, and perfectly wonderful.” Already a power
to be accounted with in national politics, he was “really a tremendous
success,” and sure to go far; “one of those delicate-looking men, who
are yet so strong you know they won't let the lightning hurt you.” It
really looked as if Helen Sherwood (whom Harkless really ought to meet)
had actually been caught in the toils at tet, those toils wherein so
many luckless youths had lain enmeshed for her sake. He must meet Mr.
Macauley, too, the most interesting man in Rouen. After her little
portrait of him, didn't Mr. Harkless agree that it looked really pretty
dull for Miss Sherwood's other lovers?

Mr. Harkless smiled, and agreed that it did indeed. She felt a thrill of
compassion for him, and her subsequent description of the pathos of
his smile was luminous. She said it was natural that a man who had been
through so much suffering from those horrible “White-Cappers” should
have a smile that struck into your heart like a knife.

Despite all that Meredith could do, and after his notorious effort to
shift the subject he could do very little, the light prattle ran on
about Helen Sherwood and Brainard Macauley. Tom abused himself for his
wild notion of cheering his visitor with these people who had no talk,
and who, if they drifted out of commonplace froth, had no medium to
float them unless they sailed the currents, of local personality, and he
mentally upbraided them for a set of gossiping ninnies. They conducted
a conversation (if it could be dignified by a name) of which no stranger
could possibly partake, and which, by a hideous coincidence, was making
his friend writhe, figuratively speaking, for Harkless sat like a fixed
shadow. He uttered scarcely a word the whole evening, though Meredith
knew that his guests would talk about him enthusiastically, the next
day, none the less. The journalist's silence was enforced by the
topics; but what expression and manner the light allowed them to see was
friendly and receptive, as though he listened to brilliant suggestions.
He had a nice courtesy, and Miss Hinsdale felt continually that she
was cleverer than usual this evening, and no one took his silence to be
churlish, though they all innocently wondered why he did not talk more;
however, it was probable that a man who had been so interestingly and
terribly shot would be rather silent for a time afterward.

That night, when Harkless had gone to bed Meredith sat late by his own
window calling himself names. He became aware of a rhomboidal patch of
yellow light on a wall of foliage without, and saw that it came from his
friend's window. After dubious consideration, he knocked softly on the
door.

“Come.”

He went in. Harkless was in bed, and laughed faintly as Meredith
entered. “I--I'm fearing you'll have to let me settle your gas bill,
Tom. I'm not like I used to be, quite. I find--since--since that
business, I can't sleep without a light. I rather get the--the horrors
in the dark.”

Incoherently, Meredith made a compassionate exclamation and turned to
go, and, as he left the room, his eye fell upon the mantel-piece. The
position of the photographs had been altered, and the picture of the
girl who looked straight out at you was gone. The mere rim of it was
visible behind the image of an old gentleman with a sardonic mouth.

An hour later, Tom came back, and spoke through the closed door. “Boy,
don't you think you can get to sleep now?”

“Yes, Tom. It's all right. You get to bed. Nothing troubles me.”

Meredith spent the next day in great tribulation and perplexity; he felt
that something had to be done, but what to do he did not know. He still
believed that a “stirring-up” was what Harkless needed--not the species
of “stirring-up” that had taken place last night, but a diversion which
would divert. As they sat at dinner, a suggestion came to him and he
determined to follow it. He was called to the telephone, and a voice
strange to his ear murmured in a tone of polite deference: “A lady
wishes to know if Mr. Meredith and his visitor intend being present at
the country-club this evening.”

He had received the same inquiry from Miss Hinsdale on her departure the
previous evening, and had answered vaguely; hence he now rejoined:

“You are quite an expert ventriloquist, but you do not deceive me.”

“I beg your pardon, sir,” creaked the small articulation.

“This is Miss Hinsdale, isn't it?”

“No, sir. The lady wishes to know if you will kindly answer her
question.”

“Tell her, yes.” He hung up the receiver, and returned to the table.
“Some of Clara Hinsdale's play,” he explained. “You made a devastating
impression on her, boy; you were wise enough not to talk any, and she
foolishly thought you were as interesting as you looked. We're going out
to a country-club dance. It's given for the devotees who stay here all
summer and swear Rouen is always cool; and nobody dances but me and the
very young ones. It won't be so bad; you can smoke anywhere, and there
are little tables. We'll go.”

“Thank you, Tom, you're so good to think of it, but----”

“But what?”

“Would you mind going alone? I find it very pleasant sitting on your
veranda, or I'll get a book.”

“Very well, if you don't want to go, I don't. I haven't had a dance for
three months and I'm still addicted to it. But of course----”

“I think I'd like to go.” Harkless acquiesced at once, with a cheerful
voice and a lifeless eye, and the good Tom felt unaccountably mean in
persisting.

They drove out into the country through mists like lakes, and found
themselves part of a procession of twinkling carriage-lights, and cigar
sparks shining above open vehicles, winding along the levels like a
canoe fete on the water. In the entrance hall of the club-house they
encountered Miss Hinsdale, very handsome, large, and dark, elaborately
beaming and bending toward them warmly.

“Who do you think is here?” she said.

“Gomez?” ventured Meredith.

“Helen Sherwood!” she cried. “Go and present Mr. Harkless before
Brainard Macauley takes her away to some corner.”




CHAPTER XVI. PRETTY MARQUISE

The two friends walked through a sort of opera-bouffe to find her; music
playing, a swaying crowd, bright lights, bright eyes, pretty women, a
glimpse of dancers footing it over a polished floor in a room beyond--a
hundred colors flashing and changing, as the groups shifted, before the
eye could take in the composition of the picture. A sudden thrill of
exhilaration rioted in John's pulses, and he trembled like a child
before the gay disclosure of a Christmas tree. Meredith swore to himself
that he would not have known him for the man of five minutes agone. Two
small, bright red spots glowed in his cheeks; he held himself erect with
head thrown back and shoulders squared, and the idolizing Tom thought he
looked as a king ought to look at the acme of power and dominion. Miss
Hinsdale's word in the hallway was the geniuses touch: a bent, gray man
of years--a word--and behold the Great John Harkless, the youth of elder
days ripened to his prime of wisdom and strength! People made way for
them and whispered as they passed. It had been years since John Harkless
had been in the midst of a crowd of butterfly people; everything seemed
unreal, or like a ball in a play; presently the curtain would fall and
close the lights and laughter from his view, leaving only the echo of
music. It was like a kaleidoscope for color: the bouquets of crimson or
white or pink or purple; the profusion of pretty dresses, the brilliant,
tender fabrics, and the handsome, foreshortened faces thrown back over
white shoulders in laughter; glossy raven hair and fair tresses moving
in quick salutations; and the whole gay shimmer of festal tints and rich
artificialities set off against the brave green of out-doors, for the
walls were solidly adorned with forest branches, with, here and there
amongst them, a blood-red droop of beech leaves, stabbed in autumn's
first skirmish with summer. The night was cool, and the air full of
flower smells, while harp, violin, and 'cello sent a waltz-throb through
it all.

They looked rapidly through several rooms and failed to find her
indoors, and they went outside, not exchanging a word, and though
Harkless was a little lame, Tom barely kept up with his long stride.
On the verandas there were fairy lamps and colored incandescents over
little tables, where people sat chatting. She was not there. Beyond
was a terrace, where a myriad of Oriental lanterns outlined themselves
clearly in fantastically shaped planes of scarlet and orange and green
against the blue darkness. Many couples and groups were scattered over
the terrace, and the young men paused on the steps, looking swiftly from
group to group. She was not there.

“We haven't looked in the dancing-room,” said Tom, looking at his
companion rather sorrowfully. John turned quickly and they reentered the
house.

He had parted from her in the blackness of storm with only the flicker
of lightning to show her to him, but it was in a blaze of lights that
he saw her again. The dance was just ended, and she stood in a wide
doorway, half surrounded by pretty girls and young men, who were
greeting her. He had one full look at her. She was leaning to them all,
her arms full of flowers, and she seemed the radiant centre of all the
light and gaiety of the place. Even Meredith stopped short and exclaimed
upon her; for one never got used to her; and he remembered that whenever
he saw her after absence the sense of her beauty rushed over him anew.
And he believed the feeling on this occasion was keener than ever
before, for she was prettier than he had ever seen her.

“No wonder!” he cried; but Harkless did not understand. As they pressed
forward, Meredith perceived that they were only two more radii of
a circle of youths, sprung from every direction as the waltz ended,
bearing down upon the common focus to secure the next dance. Harkless
saw nothing but that she stood there before him. He feared a little that
every one might notice how he was trembling, and he was glad of the many
voices that kept them from hearing his heart knock against his ribs.
She saw him coming toward her, and nodded to him pleasantly, in just the
fashion in which she was bowing to half a dozen others, and at that a
pang of hot pain went through him like an arrow--an arrow poisoned with
cordial, casual friendliness.

She extended her hand to him and gave him a smile that chilled him--it,
was so conventionally courteous and poised so nicely in the manner of
society. He went hot and cold fast enough then, for not less pleasantly
in that manner did she exclaim: “I am very glad to see you, Mr.
Harkless, so extremely glad! And so delighted to find you looking strong
again! Do tell me about all our friends in Plattville. I should like to
have a little chat with you some time. So good of you to find me in this
melee.”

And with that she turned from the poor fellow to Meredith. “How do you
do. Cousin Tom? I've saved the next dance for you.” Then she distributed
words here and there and everywhere, amongst the circle about
her--pretty Marquise with a vengeance! “No, Mr. Swift, I shall not make
a card; you must come at the beginning of a dance if you want one. I
cannot promise the next; it is quite impossible. No, I did not go as
far north as Mackinac. How do you do, Mr. Burlingame?--Yes, quite an
age;--no, not the next, I am afraid; nor the next;--I'm not keeping a
card. Good evening, Mr. Baird. No, not the next. Oh, _thank_ you, Miss
Hinsdale!--No, Mr. Swift, it is quite impossible--I'm so sorry. Cousin,
the music is commencing; this is ours.”

As she took Meredith's arm, she handed her flowers to a gentleman beside
her with the slightest glance at the recipient; and the gesture and look
made her partner heartsick for his friend; it was so easy and natural
and with the air of habit, and had so much of the manner with which a
woman hands things to a man who partakes of her inner confidences. Tom
knew that Harkless divined the gesture, as well as the identity of the
gentleman. They started away, but she paused, and turned to the latter.
“Mr. Macauley, you must meet Mr. Harkless. We leave him in your care,
and you must see that he meets all the pretty girls--you are used to
being nice to distinguished strangers, you know.”

Tom put his arm about her, and whirled her away, and Harkless felt as if
a soft hand had dealt him blow after blow in the face. Was this lady of
little baffling forms and small cold graces the girl who had been his
kind comrade, the girl who stood with him by the blue tent-pole, she who
had run to him to save his life, she who walked at his side along the
pike? The contrast of these homely scenes made him laugh grimly. Was
this she who had wept before him--was it she who had been redolent of
kindness so fragrantly natural and true--was it she who said she “loved
all these people very much, in spite of having known them only two
days”?

He cried out upon himself for a fool. What was he in her eyes but a
man who had needed to be told that she did not love him! Had he not
better--and more courteously to her--have avoided the meeting which was
necessarily an embarrassment to her? But no; he must rush like a Mohawk
till he found her and forced her to rebuff him, to veil her kindness in
little manners, to remind him that he put himself in the character of a
rejected importunate. She had punished him enough, perhaps a little too
cruelly enough, in leaving him with the man to whom she handed bouquets
as a matter of course. And this man was one whose success had long been
a trumpet at his ear, blaring loudly of his own failure in the same
career.

It had been several years since he first heard of the young editor of
the Rouen “Journal,” and nowadays almost everybody knew about Brainard
Macauley. Outwardly, he was of no unusual type: an American of affairs;
slight, easy, yet alert; relaxed, yet sharp; neat, regular, strong; a
quizzical eye, a business chin, an ambitious head with soft, straight
hair outlining a square brow; and though he was “of a type,” he was not
commonplace, and one knew at once that he would make a rattling fight to
arrive where he was going.

It appeared that he had heard of Harkless, as well as the Carlow editor
of him. They had a few moments of shop, and he talked to Harkless as a
brother craftsman, without the offense of graciousness, and spoke of his
pleasure in the meeting and of his relief at Harkless's recovery, for,
aside from the mere human feeling, the party needed him in Carlow--even
if he did not always prove himself “quite a vehement partisan.” Macauley
laughed. “But I'm not doing my duty,” he said presently; “I was to
present you to the pretty ones only, I believe. Will you designate your
preferred fashion of beauty? We serve all styles.”

“Thank you,” the other answered, hurriedly. “I met a number last
night--quite a number, indeed.” He had seen them only in dim lights,
however, and except Miss Hinsdale and the widower, had not the faintest
recognition of any of them, and he cut them all, except those two, one
after the other, before the evening was over; and this was a strange
thing for a politician to do; but he did it with such an innocent eye
that they remembered the dark porch and forgave him.

“Shall we watch the dancing, then?” asked Macauley. Harkless was already
watching part of it.

“If you will. I have not seen this sort for more than five years.”

“It is always a treat, I think, and a constant proof that the older
school of English caricaturists didn't overdraw.”

“Yes; one realizes they couldn't.”

Harkless remembered Tom Meredith's fine accomplishment of dancing;
he had been the most famous dancer of college days, and it was in the
dancer that John best saw his old friend again as he had known him, the
light lad of the active toe. Other couples flickered about the one
John watched, couples that plodded, couples that bobbed, couples that
galloped, couples that slid, but the cousins alone passed across the
glistening reflections as lightly as October leaves blown over the
forest floor. In the midst of people who danced with fixed, glassy eyes,
or who frowned with determination to do their duty or to die, and
seemed to expect the latter, or who were pale with the apprehension of
collision, or who made visible their anxiety to breathe through the nose
and look pleased at the same time, these two floated and smiled
easily upon life. Three or four steep steps made the portly and
cigarette-smoking Meredith pant like an old man, but a dance was a
cooling draught to him. As for the little Marquise--when she danced, she
danced away with all those luckless hearts that were not hers already.
The orchestra launched the jubilant measures of the deux-temps with a
torrent of vivacity, and the girl's rhythmic flight answered like a sail
taking the breeze.

There was one heart she had long since won which answered her every
movement. Flushed, rapturous, eyes sparkling, cheeks aglow, the small
head weaving through the throng like a golden shuttle--ah, did she know
how adorable she was! Was Tom right: is it the attainable unattainable
to one man and given to some other that leaves a deeper mark upon him
than success? At all events the unattainable was now like a hot sting
in the heart, but yet a sting more precious than a balm. The voice of
Brainard Macauley broke in:

“A white brow and a long lash, a flushing cheek and a soft eye, a voice
that laughs and breaks and ripples in the middle of a word, a girl you
could put in your hat, Mr. Harkless--and there you have a strong man
prone! But I congratulate you on the manner your subordinates operate
the 'Herald' during your absence. I understand you are making it a
daily.”

Macauley was staring at him quizzically, and Harkless, puzzled, but
without resentment of the other's whimsey, could only decide that the
editor of the Rouen “Journal” was an exceedingly odd young man. All at
once he found Meredith and the girl herself beside him; they had stopped
before the dance was finished. He had the impulse to guard himself from
new blows as a boy throws up his elbow to ward a buffet, and, although
he could not ward with his elbow, for his heart was on his sleeve--where
he began to believe that Macauley had seen it--he remembered that he
could smile with as much intentional mechanism as any wornout rounder of
afternoons. He stepped aside for her, and she saw what she had known but
had not seen before, for the thickness of the crowd, and this was that
he limped and leaned upon his stick.

“Do let me thank you,” he said, with a louder echo of her manner of
greeting him, a little earlier. “It has been such a pleasure to watch
you dance. It is really charming to meet you here. If I return to
Plattville I shall surely remember to tell Miss Briscoe.”

At this she surprised him with a sudden, clear look in the eyes, so
reproachful, so deep, so sad, that he started. She took her flowers
from Macauley, who had the air of understanding the significance of such
ceremonies very well, and saying, “Shan't we all go out on the terrace?”
 placed her arm in Harkless's, and conducted him (and not the others)
to the most secluded corner of the terrace, a nook illumined by one
Japanese lantern; to which spot it was his belief that he led her. She
sank into a chair, with the look of the girl who had stood by the blue
tent-pole. He could only stare at her, amazed by her abrupt change to
this dazzling, if reproachful, kindness, confused by his good fortune.

“'_If_ you go back to Plattville!'” she said in a low voice. “What do
you mean?”

“I don't know. I've been dull lately, and I thought I might go somewhere
else.” Caught in a witchery no lack of possession could dispel, and
which the prospect of loss made only stronger while it lasted, he took
little thought of what he said; little thought of anything but of the
gladness it was to be with her again.

“'Somewhere else?' Where?”

“Anywhere.”

“Have you no sense of responsibility? What is to become of your paper?”

“The 'Herald'? Oh, it will potter along, I think.”

“But what has become of it in your absence, already? Has it not
deteriorated very much?”

“No,” he said; “it's better than it ever was before.”

“What!” she cried, with a little gasp.

“You're so astounded at my modesty?”

“But please tell me what you mean,” she said quickly. “What happened to
it?”

“Isn't the 'Herald' rather a dull subject? I'll tell you how well Judge
Briscoe looked when he came to see me; or, rather, tell me of your
summer in the north.”

“No,” she answered earnestly. “Don't you remember my telling you that I
am interested in newspaper work?”

“I have even heard so from others,” he said, with an instant of dryness.

“Please tell me about the 'Herald'?”

“It is very simple. Your friend, Mr. Fisbee, found a substitute, a
relative six feet high with his coat off, a traction engine for energy
and a limited mail for speed. He writes me letters on a type writer
suffering from an impediment in its speech; and in brief, he is an
enterprising idiot with a mania for work-baskets.”

Her face was in the shadow.

“You say the--idiot--is enterprising?” she inquired.

“Far more enterprising and far less idiot than I. They are looking
for oil down there, and when he came he knew less about oil than a
kindergarten babe, and spoke of 'boring for kerosene' in his first
letter to me; but he knows it all now, and writes long and convincing
geological arguments. If a well comes in, he is prepared to get out an
extra! Perhaps you may understand what that means in Plattville, with
the 'Herald's' numerous forces. I owe him everything, even the shares in
the oil company, which he has persuaded me to take. And he is going to
dare to make the 'Herald' a daily. Do you remember asking me why I had
never done that? It seemed rather a venture to try to compete with the
Rouen papers in offering State and foreign news, but this young
Gulliver has tacked onto the Associated Press, and means to print a
quarto--that's eight pages, you know--once a week, Saturday, and a
double sheet, four pages, on other mornings. The daily venture begins
next Monday.”

“Will it succeed?”

“Oh, no!” he laughed.

“You think not?” Her interest in this dull business struck him as
astonishing, and yet in character with her as he had known her in
Plattville. Then he wondered unhappily if she thought that talking
of the “Herald” and learning things about the working of a country
newspaper would help her to understand Brainard Macauley.

“Why have you let him go on with it?” she asked. “I suppose you have
encouraged him?”

“Oh, yes, I encouraged him. The creature's recklessness fascinated me. A
dare-devil like that is always charming.'”

“You think there is no chance for the creature's succeeding with the
daily?”

“None,” he replied indifferently.

“You mentioned work-baskets, I think?”

He laughed again. “I believe him to be the original wooden-nutmeg man.
Once a week he produces a 'Woman's Page,' wherein he presents to the
Carlow female public three methods for making currant jelly, three
receipts for the concoction of salads, and directs the ladies how to
manufacture a pretty work-basket out of odd scraps in twenty minutes.
The astonishing part of it is that he has not yet been mobbed by the
women who have followed his directions.”

“So you think the daily is a mistake and that your enterprising idiot
should be mobbed? Why?” She seemed to be taking him very seriously.

“I think he may be--for his 'Woman's Page.'”

“It is all wrong, you think?”

“What could a Yankee six-footer cousin of old Fisbee's know about
currant jelly and work-baskets?”

“You know about currant jelly and work-baskets yourself?”

“Heaven defend the right, I do not!”

“You are sure he is six feet?”

“You should see his signature; that leaves no doubt. And, also, his
ability denotes his stature.”

“You believe that ability is in proportion to height, do you not?” There
was a dangerous luring in her tone.

His memory recalled to him that he was treading on undermined ground, so
he hastened to say: “In inverse proportion.”

“Then your substitute is a failure. I see,” she said, slowly.

What muffled illumination there was in their nook fell upon his face;
her back was toward it, so that she was only an outline to him, and he
would have been startled and touched to the quick, could he have known
that her lip quivered and her eyes filled with tears as she spoke the
last words. He was happy as he had not been since his short June day;
it was enough to be with her again. Nothing, not even Brainard Macauley,
could dull his delight. And, besides, for a few minutes he had forgotten
Brainard Macauley. What more could man ask than to sit in the gloom with
her, to know that he was near her again for a little while, and to talk
about anything--if he talked at all? Nonsense and idle exaggeration
about young Fisbee would do as well as another thing.

“The young gentleman is an exception,” he returned. “I told you I owed
everything to him; my gratitude will not allow me to admit that his
ability is less than his stature. He suggested my purchase of a quantity
of Mr. Watts's oil stock when it was knocked flat on its back by two
wells turning out dry; but if Mr. Watts's third well comes in, and young
Fisbee has convinced me that it will, and if my Midas's extra booms the
stock and the boom develops, I shall oppose the income tax. Poor old
Plattville will be full of strangers and speculators, and the 'Herald'
will advocate vast improvements to impress the investor's eye.
Stagnation and picturesqueness will flee together; it is the history
of the Indiana town. Already the 'Herald' is clamoring with Schofields'
Henry--you remember the bell-ringer?--for Main Street to be asphalted.
It will all come. The only trouble with young Fisbee is that he has too
much ability.”

“And yet the daily will not succeed?”

“No. That's too big a jump, unless my young man's expressions on the
tariff command a wide sale amongst curio-hunters.”

“Then he is quite a fool about political matters?”

“Far from it; he is highly ingenious. His editorials are often the
subtlest cups of flattery I ever sipped, many of them showing assiduous
study of old files to master the method and notions of his eagle-eyed
predecessor. But the tariff seems to have got him. He is a very
masculine person, except for this one feminine quality, for, if I may
say it without ungallantry, there is a legend that no woman has ever
understood the tariff. Young Fisbee must be an extremely travelled
person, because the custom-house people have made an impression upon him
which no few encounters with them could explain, and he conceives the
tariff to be a law which discommodes a lady who has been purchasing
gloves in Paris. He thinks smuggling the great evil of the present
tariff system; it is such a temptation, so insidious a break-down of
moral fibre. His views must edify Carlow.”

She gave a quick, stifled cry. “Oh! there isn't a word of truth in what
you say! Not a word! I did not think you could be so cruel!”

He bent forward, peering at her in astonishment.

“Cruel!”

“You know it is a hateful distortion--an exaggeration!” she exclaimed
passionately. “No man living could have so little sense as you say
he has. The tariff is perfectly plain to any child. When you were in
Plattville you weren't like this--I didn't know you were unkind!”

“I--I don't understand, please----”

“Miss Hinsdale has been talking--raving--to me about you! You may not
know it--though I suppose you do--but you made a conquest last night.
It seems a little hard on the poor young man who is at work for you in
Plattville, doing his best for you, plodding on through the hot days,
and doing all he knows how, while you sit listening to music in the
evenings with Clara Hinsdale, and make a mock of his work and his trying
to please you----”

“But I didn't mention him to Miss Hinsdale. In fact, I didn't mention
_anything_ to Miss Hinsdale. What have I done? The young man is making
his living by his work--and my living, too, for that matter. It only
seems to me that his tariff editorials are rather humorous.”

She laughed suddenly--ringingly. “Of course they are! How should I know?
Immensely humorous! And the good creature knows nothing beyond smuggling
and the custom-house and chalk marks? Why, even _I_--ha, ha, ha!--even
_I_--should have known better than that. What a little fool your
enterprising idiot must be!--with his work-baskets and currant jelly
and his trying to make the 'Herald' a daily!--It will be a ludicrous
failure, of course. No doubt he thought he was being quite wise, and
was pleased over his tariff editorials--his funny, funny editorials--his
best--to please you! Ha, ha, ha! How immensely funny!”

“Do you know him?” he asked abruptly.

“I have not the honor of the gentleman's acquaintance. Ah,” she rejoined
bitterly, “I see what you mean; it is the old accusation, is it? I am a
woman, and I 'sound the personal note.' I could not resent a cruelty
for the sake of a man I do not know. But let it go. My resentment is
personal, after all, since it is against a man I do know--_you_!”

He leaned toward her because he could not help it. “I'd rather have
resentment from you than nothing.”

“Then I will give you nothing,” she answered quickly.

“You flout me!” he cried. “That is better than resentment.”

“I hate you most, I think,” she said with a tremulousness he did not
perceive, “when you say you do not care to go back to Plattville.”

“Did I say it?”

“It is in every word, and it is true; you don't care to go back there.”

“Yes, it is true; I don't.”

“You want to leave the place where you do good; to leave those people
who love you, who were ready to die to avenge your hurt!” she exclaimed
vehemently. “Oh, I say that is shameful!”

“Yes, I know,” he returned gravely. “I am ashamed.”

“Don't say that!” she cried. “Don't say you are ashamed of it. Do you
suppose I do not understand the dreariness it has been for you? Don't
you know that I see it is a horror to you, that it brings back your
struggle with those beasts in the dark, and revivifies all your
suffering, merely to think of it?” Her turns and sudden contradictions
left him tangled in a maze; he could not follow, but must sit helpless
to keep pace with her, while the sheer happiness of being with her
tingled through his veins. She rose and took a step aside, then spoke
again: “Well, since you want to leave Carlow, you shall; since you do
not wish to return, you need not.--Are you laughing at me?” She leaned
toward him, and looked at him steadily, with her face close to his. He
was not laughing; his eyes shone with a deep fire; in that nearness he
hardly comprehended what she said. “Thank you for not laughing,” she
whispered, and leaned back from him. “I suppose you think my promises
are quite wild, and they are. I do not know what I was talking about, or
what I meant, any better than you do. You may understand some day. It
is all--I mean that it hurts one to hear you say you do not care for
Carlow.” She turned away. “Come.”

“Where?”

“It is my turn to conclude the interview. You remember, the last time it
was you who--” She broke off, shuddering, and covered her face with her
hands. “Ah, that!” she exclaimed. “I did not think--I did not mean to
speak of that miserable, miserable night. And _I_ to be harsh with you
for not caring to go back to Carlow!”

“Your harshness,” he laughed. “A waft of eider.”

“We must go,” she said. He did not move, but sat staring at her like a
thirsty man drinking. With an impulsive and pretty gesture she reached
out her hand to him. Her little, white glove trembled in the night
before his eyes, and his heart leaped to meet its sudden sweet
generosity; his thin fingers closed over it as he rose, and then that
hand he had likened to a white butterfly lay warm and light and quiet in
his own. And as they had so often stood together in their short day and
their two nights of the moon, so now again they stood with a serenading
silence between them. A plaintive waltz-refrain from the house ran
through the blue woof of starlit air as a sad-colored thread through
the tapestry of night; they heard the mellow croon of the 'cello and the
silver plaints of violins, the chiming harp, and the triangle bells,
all woven into a minor strain of dance-music that beat gently upon their
ears with such suggestion of the past, that, as by some witchcraft of
hearing, they listened to music made for lovers dancing, and lovers
listening, a hundred years ago.

“I care for only one thing in this world,” he said, tremulously. “Have
I lost it? I didn't mean to ask you, that last night, although you
answered. Have I no chance? Is it still the same? Do I come too late?”

The butterfly fluttered in his hand and then away.

She drew back and looked at him a moment.

“There is one thing you must always understand,” she said gently, “and
that is that a woman can be grateful. I give you all the gratitude there
is in me, and I think I have a great deal; it is all yours. Will you
always remember that?”

“Gratitude? What can there--”

“You do not understand now, but some day you will. I ask you to remember
that my every act and thought which bore reference to you--and there
have been many--came from the purest gratitude. Although you do not see
it now, will you promise to believe it?”

“Yes,” he said simply.

“For the rest--” She paused. “For the rest--I do not love you.”

He bowed his head and did not lift it.

“Do you understand?” she asked.

“I understand,” he answered, quietly.

She looked at him long, and then, suddenly, her hand to her heart, gave
a little, pitying, tender cry and moved toward him. At this he raised
his head and smiled sadly. “No; don't you mind,” he said. “It's all
right. I was such a cad the other time I needed to be told; I was
so entirely silly about it, I couldn't face the others to tell them
good-night, and I left you out there to go in to them alone. I didn't
realize, for my manners were all gone. I'd lived in a kind of stupor,
I think, for a long time; then being with you was like a dream, and the
sudden waking was too much for me. I've been ashamed often, since, in
thinking of it--and I was well punished for not taking you in. I thought
only of myself, and I behaved like a whining, unbalanced boy. But I had
whined from the moment I met you, because I was sickly with egoism and
loneliness and self-pity. I'm keeping you from the dancing. Won't you
let me take you back to the house?”

A commanding and querulous contralto voice was heard behind them, and a
dim, majestic figure appeared under the Japanese lantern.

“Helen?”

The girl turned quickly. “Yes, mamma.”

“May I ask you to return to the club-house for supper with me? Your
father has been very much worried about you. We have all been looking
for you.”

“Mamma, this is Mr. Harkless.”

“How do you do?” The lady murmured this much so far under her breath
that the words might have been mistaken for anything else--most
plausibly, perhaps, for, “Who cares if it is?”--nor further did she
acknowledge John's profound inclination. Frigidity and complaint of
ill-usage made a glamour in every fold of her expensive garments; she
was large and troubled and severe. A second figure emerged from behind
her and bowed with the suave dignity that belonged to Brainard Macauley.
“Mr. Macauley has asked to sit at our table,” Mrs. Sherwood said to
Helen. “May I beg you to come at once? Your father is holding places for
us.”

“Certainly,” she answered. “I will follow you with Mr. Harkless.”

“I think Mr. Harkless will excuse you,” said the elder lady. “He has
an engagement. Mr. Meredith has been looking everywhere for him to take
Miss Hinsdale out to supper.”

“Good-night, Miss Sherwood,” said John in a cheerful voice. “I thank you
for sitting out the dance with me.”

“Good-night,” she said, and gave him her hand. “I'm so sorry I shan't
see you again; I am only in Rouen for this evening, or I should ask you
to come to see me. I am leaving to-morrow morning. Good-night.--Yes,
mamma.”

The three figures went toward the bright lights of the club-house. She
was leaning on Macauley's arm and chatting gaily, smiling up at him
brightly. John watched her till she was lost in the throng on the
veranda. There, in the lights, where waiters were arranging little
tables, every one was talking and moving about, noisily, good-humored
and happy. There was a flourish of violins, and then the orchestra swung
into a rampant march that pranced like uncurbed cavalry; it stirred the
blood of old men with militant bugle calls and blast of horns; it
might have heralded the chariot of a flamboyant war god rioting out of
sunrise, plumed with youth. Some quite young men on the veranda made
as if they were restive horses champing at the bit and heading a
procession, and, from a group near by, loud laughter pealed.

John Harkless lifted to his face the hand that had held hers; there was
the faint perfume of her glove. He kissed his own hand. Then he put that
hand and the other to his forehead, and sank into her chair.

“Let me get back,” he said. “Let me get back to Plattville, where I
belong.”

Tom Meredith came calling him. “Harkless? John Harkless?”

“Here I am, Tom.”

“Come along, boy. What on earth are you doing out here all alone? I
thought you were with--I thought some people were with you. You're
bored to death, I know; but come along and be bored some more, because I
promised to bring you in for supper. Then we'll go home. They've saved a
place for you by Miss Hinsdale.”

“Very well, lad,” answered Harkless, and put his hand on the other's
shoulder. “Thank you.”

The next day he could not leave his bed; his wounds were feverish and
his weakness had returned. Meredith was shaken with remorse because
he had let him wander around in the damp night air with no one to look
after him.




CHAPTER XVII. HELEN'S TOAST

Judge Briscoe was sitting out under the afternoon sky with his chair
tilted back and his feet propped against the steps. His coat was off,
and Minnie sat near at hand sewing a button on the garment for him, and
she wore that dreamy glaze that comes over women's eyes when they sew
for other people.

From the interior of the house rose and fell the murmur of a number of
voices engaged in a conversation, which, for a time, seemed to consist
of dejected monosyllables; but presently the judge and Minnie heard
Helen's voice, clear, soft, and trembling a little with excitement. She
talked only two or three minutes, but what she said stirred up a great
commotion. All the voices burst forth at once in ejaculations--almost
shouts; but presently they were again subdued and still, except for
the single soft one, which held forth more quietly, but with a deeper
agitation, than any of the others.

“You needn't try to bamboozle me,” said the judge in a covert tone to
his daughter, and with a glance at the parlor window, whence now issued
the rumble of Warren Smith's basso. “I tell you that girl would follow
John Harkless to Jericho.”

Minnie shook her head mysteriously, and bit a thread with a vague frown.

“Well, why not?” asked the judge crossly.

“Why wouldn't she have him, then?”

“Well, who knows he's asked her yet?”

Minnie screamed derisively at the density of man, “What made him run off
that way, the night he was hurt? Why didn't he come back in the house
with her?”

“Pshaw!”

“Don't you suppose a woman understands?”

“Meaning that you know more about it than I do, I presume,” grunted the
old gentleman.

“Yes, father,” she replied, smiling benignantly upon him.

“Did she tell you?” he asked abruptly.

“No, no. I guess the truth is that women don't know more than men so
much as they see more; they understand more without having to read about
it.”

“That's the way of it, is it?” he laughed. “Well, it don't make any
difference, she'll have him some time.”

“No, father; it's only gratitude.”

“Gratitude!” The judge snorted scornfully. “Girls don't do as much as
she's done for him out of gratitude. _Look_ what she's doing; not only
running the 'Herald' for him, but making it a daily, and a good daily at
that. First time I saw her I knew right away she was the smartest girl
I ever laid eyes on;--I expect she must have got it from her mother.
Gratitude! Pooh! Look how she's studied his interests, and watched like
a cat for chances for him in everything. Didn't she get him into Eph
Watts's company? She talked to Watts and the other fellows, day after
day, and drove around their leased land with 'em, and studied it up, and
got on the inside, and made him buy. Now, if they strike it--and
she's sure they will, and _I_'m sure she knows when to have faith in a
thing--why, they'll sell out to the Standard, and they can all quit work
for the rest of their lives if they want to; and Harkless gets as
much as any without lifting a finger, all because he had a little
money--mighty little, too--laid up in bank and a girl that saw where to
put it. She did that for him, didn't she?”

“Don't you see what fun it's been for her?” returned Minnie. “She's been
having the best time she ever had; I never knew any one half so happy.”

“Yes; she went up and saw him at that party, and she knows he's still
thinking about her. I shouldn't be surprised if he asked her then, and
that's what makes her so gay.”

“Well, she couldn't have said 'yes,' because he went back to his bed the
next day, and he's been there most of the time since.”

“Pshaw! He wasn't over his injuries, and he was weak and got malaria.”

“Well, she couldn't be so happy while he's sick, if she cared very much
about him.”

“He's not very sick. She's happy because she's working for him, and she
knows his illness isn't serious. He'll be a well man when she says the
word. He's love-sick, that's what he is; I never saw a man so taken down
with it in my life.”

“Then it isn't malaria?” Minnie said, with a smile of some superiority.

“You're just like your poor mother,” the old gentleman answered, growing
rather red. “She never could learn to argue. What I say is that Helen
cares about him, whether she says she does or not, whether she acts like
it or not--or whether she thinks she does or not,” he added irascibly.
“Do you know what she's doing for him to-day?”

“Not exactly.”

“Well, when they were talking together at that party, he said something
that made her think he was anxious to get away from Plattville--you're
not to repeat this, child; she told me, relying on my discretion.”

“Well?”

“Do you know why she's got these men to come here to-day to meet
her--Warren Smith and Landis and Homer, and Boswell and young Keating of
Amo, and Tom Martin and those two fellows from Gaines County?”

“Something about politics, isn't it?”

“'Something about politics!'” he echoed. “I should say it is! Wait till
it's done, and this evening I'll tell you--if you can keep a secret.”

Minnie set her work-basket on the steps. “Oh, I guess I can keep a
secret,” she said. “But it won't make any difference.”

“You mean you've said it, and you'll stick to it that it's gratitude
till their wedding day.”

“She knows he gave her father something to do, and helped him in other
ways, when no one else did.”

“I know all about that. She reproaches herself for having neglected
Fisbee while a stranger took care of him, and saved him from
starving--and worse. She's unreasonable about it; she didn't know he
was in want till long after. That's just like Fisbee, to tell her,
afterwards. He didn't tell her how low he got; but he hinted at it
to her, and I guess she understood; I gathered that much from him. Of
course she's grateful, but gratefulness don't account for everything.”

“Yes it does.”

“Well, I never expected to have the last word with a woman.”

“Well, you needn't,” said Minnie.

“I don't. I never do,” he retorted. She did not answer, but hummed a
little tune and looked up at the tree-tops.

Warren Smith appeared in the doorway. “Judge,” he said, “will you step
inside? We need you.”

Briscoe nodded and rose at once. As he reached the door, Minnie said in
a piercing whisper:

“It's hard to be sure about her, but I'm right; it's gratitude.”

“There,” he replied, chuckling, “I thought I shouldn't have the last
word.” Minnie began to sing, and the judge, after standing in the
doorway till he was again summoned from within, slowly retired.



Briscoe had persisted in his own explanation of Helen's gaiety;
nevertheless he did not question his daughter's assumption that the
young lady was enjoying her career in Carlow. She was free as a bird
to go and come, and her duties and pleasures ran together in a happy
excitement. Her hands were full of work, but she sought and increased
new tasks, and performed them also. She came to Carlow as unused to the
soil as was Harkless on his arrival, and her educational equipment for
the work was far less than his; her experience, nothing. But both were
native to the State; and the genius of the American is adaptability,
and both were sprung from pioneers whose means of life depended on that
quality.

There are, here and there, excrescent individuals who, through stock
decadence, or their inability to comprehend republican conditions,
are not assimilated by the body of the country; but many of these are
imports, while some are exports. Our foreign-born agitators now and then
find themselves removed by the police to institutions of routine,
while the romantic innocents who set up crests in the face of an
unimpressionable democracy are apt to be lured by their own curious
ambitions, or those of their women-folk, to spend a great part of their
time in or about the villas of Albion, thus paid for its perfidy; and,
although the anarchists and the bubble-hunters make a noise, it is
enormously out of proportion to their number, which is relatively very
small, and neither the imported nor the exported article can be taken as
characteristic of our country. For the American is one who soon fits any
place, or into any shaped hole in America, where you can set him down.
It may be that without going so far as to suggest the halls of the great
and good and rich, one might mention a number of houses of entertainment
for man and beast in this country, in which Mr. Martin of the Plattville
Dry Goods Emporium would find himself little at ease. But even in the
extreme case, if Mr. Martin were given his choice of being burned to
death, or drowned, or of spending a month at the most stupendously
embellished tavern located in our possessions, and supposing him to
have chosen the third alternate, it is probable that he would have grown
almost accustomed to his surroundings before he died; and if he survived
the month, we may even fancy him really enjoying moments of conversation
with the night-clerks.

As Mr. Parker observed, Miss Sherwood did not do the Grand Duchess,
giving the Carlow tenants a treat. She felt no duchess symptoms within
herself, and though, of course, she had various manners tucked away to
wear as one suits garments to occasions--and it was a Rouen “party-gown”
 wherewith she chose to abash poor John Harkless at their meeting--here
in Carlow, she was a woman of affairs, lively, shrewd, engaging,
capable; she was herself (at least she was that side of herself). And
it should be explained that Harkless had based his calumny regarding the
tariff on a paragraph or two that crept inadvertently into an otherwise
statesmanlike article, and that “H. Fisbee” understood the tariff
as well as any woman who ever lived. But the tariff inspired no more
articles from that pen.

Rodney McCune had lifted his head, and those who had followed his
stricken enemy felt that the cause was lost, without the leader. The old
ring that the “Herald” had crushed was a ring once more, and the heelers
had rallied--“the boys were in line again.” The work had been done
quietly, and Halloway was already beaten, and beaten badly. John
Harkless lay sick, and Rodney McCune would sit in Congress, for the
nomination meant election. But one day the Harkless forces, demoralized,
broken, almost hopeless, woke up to find that they had a leader. Many
of them were content with the belief that this was a young lawyer
named Keating, who had risen up in Amo; but Mr. Keating himself had a
different impression.

Helen was a little nervous, and very much excited, over the political
conference at Judge Briscoe's. She planned it with careful diplomacy,
and arranged the details with a fine sense of the dramatic. There was
a suggestion she desired to have made in this meeting, which she
wished should emanate from the Amo and Gaines County people, instead of
proceeding from Carlow--for she thought it better to make the outsiders
believe her idea an inspiration of their own--so she made a little
comedy and provided for Briscoe's entrance at an effective moment. The
judge was a substantial influence, strong in the councils of his party
when he chose to be; and though of late years he had contented himself
with voting at the polls, every one knew what weight he carried when he
saw fit to bestir himself.

When he entered the parlor, he found the politicians in a state of
subdued excitement. Helen sat by the window, blushing, and talking
eagerly to old Fisbee. One of the gentlemen from Gaines County was
walking about the room exclaiming, “A glorious conception! A glorious
conception!” addressing the bric-a-brac, apparently. (He thought the
conception his own.) Mr. Martin was tugging at his beard and whispering
to Landis and Homer, and the two Amo men were consulting in a corner,
but as the judge came in, one of them turned and said loudly, “That's
the man.”

“What man am I, Keating?” asked Briscoe, cheerily.

“We better explain, I guess,” answered the other; and turning to his
compatriot: “You tell him, Boswell.”

“Well--it's this way--” said Boswell, and came at once to an awkward
pause, turning aside sheepishly and unable to proceed.

“So that's the way of it, is it?” said the old gentleman.

Helen laughed cheerfully, and looked about her with a courageous and
encouraging eye. “It is embarrassing,” she said. “Judge Briscoe, we are
contemplating 'a piece of the blackest treachery and chicanery.' We are
going to give Mr. Halloway the--the go-by!” The embarrassment fell away,
and everybody began to talk at once.

“Hold on a minute,” said the judge; “let's get at it straight. What do
you want with me?”

“I'll tell you,” volunteered Keating. “You see, the boys are getting in
line again for this convention. They are the old file that used to rule
the roost before the 'Herald' got too strong for them, and they rely on
Mr. Harkless's being sick to beat Kedge Halloway with that Gaines
County man, McCune. Now, none of us here want Rod McCune I guess. We had
trouble enough once with him and his heelers, and now that Mr. Harkless
is down, they've taken advantage of it to raise a revolution: Rod McCune
for Congress! He's a dirty-hearted swindler--I hope Miss Sherwood will
pardon the strong expression--and everybody thought the 'Herald' had
driven him out of politics, though it never told how it did it; but
he's up on top again. Now, the question is to beat him. We hold the
committees, but the boys have been fighting the committees--call 'em
the 'Harkless Ring,' and never understood that the 'Herald' would have
turned us down in a second if it thought we weren't straight. Well,
we saw a week ago that Kedge Halloway was going to lose to McCune; we
figured it out pretty exactly, and there ain't a ray of hope for Kedge.
We wrote to Mr. Harkless about it, and asked him to come down--if he'd
been on the ground last Monday and had begun to work, I don't say but
what his personal influence might have saved Halloway--but a friend of
his, where he's staying, answered the letter: said Mr. Harkless was
down with a relapse and was very fretful; and he'd taken the liberty of
reading the letter and temporarily suppressing it under doctor's orders;
they were afraid he'd come, sick as he was, from a sense of duty, and
asked us to withdraw the letter, and referred us to Mr. Harkless's
representative on the 'Herald.' So we applied here to Miss Sherwood, and
that's why we had this meeting. Now, Halloway is honest--everybody knows
that--and I don't say but what he's been the best available material Mr.
Harkless had to send to Washington; but he ain't any too bright----”

Mr. Martin interrupted the speaker. “I reckon, maybe, you never heard
that lecture of his on the Past, Present, and Future'?”

“Besides that,” Keating continued, “Halloway has had it long enough,
and he's got enough glory out of it, and, except for getting beat by Rod
McCune, I believe he'd almost as soon give it up. Well, we discussed all
this and that, and couldn't come to any conclusion. We didn't want to
keep on with a losing fight if there was any way to put up a winner,
though of course we all recognized that Mr. Harkless would want us to
support Kedge to the death, and that's what he'd do if he was on the
ground. But Miss Sherwood mentioned that she'd had one note since his
last illness began, and he'd entrusted her and her associates on the
paper with the entire policy, and she would take the responsibility for
anything we determined on. Mr. Smith said the only thing to do was
to give up Halloway and get a man that could beat McCune; Kedge would
recognize it himself, that that was the only thing to do, and he could
retire gracefully. Miss Sherwood said she was still more or less a
stranger, and asked what man we could find who was strong enough to do
it by popularity alone and who was also a man we wanted; somebody that
had worked a good deal, but had never had any office. It was to such a
man she could promise the 'Herald's' support, as for a time the paper
was being operated almost independently, it might be said, of Mr.
Harkless. Well, I expect it came to all of us at the same time, but it
was Mr. Bence here that said it first.”

Mr. Bence was the gentleman who had walked about saying “A glorious
conception,” and he now thrust one hand into his breast and extended the
other in a wide gesture, and looked as impressive as a very young man
with white eyebrows can look.

“The name of Harkless,” he said abruptly, “the name of Harkless will
sweep the convention like the fire of a Western prairie; the name of
Harkless will thunder over their astonished heads and strike a peal
of joy bells in every home in the district; it will re-echo in the
corridors of posterity and teem with prosperity like a mighty river.
The name of Harkless will reverberate in that convention hall, and they
shall sit ashamed.”

“Harkless!” exclaimed the judge. “Why didn't some one think of that long
ago?”

“Then you approve?” asked Keating.

“Yes, I think I do!”

The Amo man shook hands with him. “We'll swim out,” he exclaimed. “It
will be the same everywhere. A lot of the old crowd themselves will be
swept along with us when we make our nomination. People feel that that
Cross-Roads business ought never to have been allowed to happen,
and they'd like to make it up to him some way. There are just two
difficulties, Halloway and Mr. Harkless himself. It's a sure thing that
he wouldn't come out against Kedge and that he'd refuse to let his name
be used against him. Therefore, we've got to keep it quiet from him; the
whole thing has to be worked quietly. The McCune folks were quiet until
they thought they were sure; we've got to be quieter still. Well, we've
made out a plan.”

“And a plan that will operate,” added Mr. Bence. “For the name of
Harkless shall--” Mr. Keating interrupted him energetically:

“We explain it to all the Halloway delegates, you see, and to all the
shaky McCune people, and interview all the undecided ones. The McCune
crowd may see them afterwards, but they can't fix men in this district
against John Harkless. All we've got to do is to pass the word. It's all
kept quiet, you understand. We go into the convention, and the names of
Halloway and McCune are placed before it. Then will come a speech naming
Harkless--and you want to stuff your ears with cotton! On the first
ballot Harkless gets the scattering vote that was going to nominate
McCune if we'd let things run, and Halloway is given every vote he'd
have got if he'd run against McCune alone; it's as a compliment; it will
help him see how things were, afterwards; and on the second ballot his
vote goes to Harkless. There won't be any hitch if we get down to work
right off; it's a mighty short campaign, but we've got big chances. Of
course, it can't be helped that Halloway has to be kept in the dark; he
won't spend any money, anyway.”

“It looks a little underhanded at first glance,” said Warren Smith;
“but, as Miss Sherwood said, you've got to be a little underhanded
sometimes, especially when you're dealing with as scrupulous a man as
John Harkless. But it's a perfectly honest deal, and it will be all
right with him when he finds it's all over and he's nominated.”

“It's a plain case,” added Boswell. “We want him, and we've got to have
him.”

“There's one danger,” Mr. Keating continued. “Kedge Halloway is honest,
but I believe he's selfish enough to disturb his best friend's deathbed
for his own ends, and it's not unlikely that he will get nervous towards
the last and be telegraphing Harkless to have himself carried on a cot
to the convention to save him. That wouldn't do at all, of course,
and Miss Sherwood thinks maybe there'd be less danger if we set the
convention a little ahead of the day appointed. It's dangerous, because
it shortens our time; but we can fix it for three days before the day
we'd settled on, and that will bring it to September 7th. What we want
of you, judge, is to go to the convention as a delegate, and make the
nominating speech for Mr. Harkless. Will you do it?”

“Do it?” cried the old man, and he struck the table a resounding blow
with his big fist. “Do it? I'd walk from here to Rouen and back again to
do it!”

They were all on their feet at this, and they pressed forward to shake
Briscoe's hand, congratulating him and each other as though they were
already victorious. Mr. Martin bent over Helen and asked her if she
minded shaking hands with a man who had voted for Shem at the first
election in the Ark.

“I thought I'd rightly ort to thank you for finishin' off Kedge
Halloway,” he added. “I made up my mind I'd never vote for him again,
the night he killed that intellectual insect of his.”

“Intellectual insect, Mr. Martin?” she asked, puzzled.

He sighed. “The recollection never quits ha'ntin' me. I reckon I haven't
had a restful night since June. Maybe you don't remember his lecture.”

“Oh, but I do,” she laughed; “and I remember the story of the fly,
vividly.”

“I never was jest what you might exactly call gushin' over Kedge,”
 Mr. Martin drawled. “He doesn't strike me as havin' many ideas,
precisely--he had kind of a symptom of one once, that he caught from
Harkless, but it didn't take; it sloshed around in his mind and never
really come out on him. I always thought his brain was sort of syrupy.
Harkless thought there was fruit in it, and I reckon there is; but some
way it never seems to jell.”

“Go on,” said Helen gayly. “I want to hear him abused. It helps me to
feel less mean about the way we are treating him.”

“Yes; I'm slickin' over my conscience, too. I feel awnrier about it
because he done me a good turn once, in the Hayes and Wheeler campaign.
I went to a meetin' to hear him speak, and he got sick and couldn't.”

Warren Smith addressed the company. “Well, is this all for the present?”
 he asked. “Is everything settled?”

“Wait a minute,” said Keating. “I'd like to hear from the 'Herald' about
its policy, if Miss Sherwood will tell us.”

“Yes, indeed,” she answered. “It will be very simple. Don't you think
there is only one course to pursue? We will advocate no one very
energetically, but we will print as much of the truth about Mr. McCune
as we can, with delicacy and honor, in this case, but, as I understand
it, the work is almost all to be done amongst the delegates. We shall
not mention our plan at all--but--but, when the convention is over, and
he is nominated, we will get out an extra; and I am so confident of your
success that I'll tell you now that the extra will be ready the night
before the convention. We will contrive that Mr. Harkless shall not
receive his copy of the paper containing the notice of the change of
date, and I think the chance of his seeing it in any Rouen paper may be
avoided. That is all, I think.”

“Thank you,” said Keating. “That is certainly the course to follow.”
 Every one nodded, or acquiesced in words; and Keating and Bence came
over to Helen and engaged her in conversation. The others began to look
about for their hats, vaguely preparing to leave.

“Wait a minute,” said the judge. “There's no train due just now.” And
Minnie appeared in the doorway with a big pitcher of crab-apple cider,
rich and amber-hued, sparkling, cold, and redolent of the sweet-smelling
orchard where it was born. Behind Miss Briscoe came Mildy Upton with
glasses and a fat, shaking, four-storied jelly-cake on a second
tray. The judge passed his cigars around, and the gentlemen took them
blithely, then hesitatingly held them in their fingers and glanced at
the ladies, uncertain of permission.

“Let me get you some matches,” Helen said, quickly, and found a box on
the table and handed it to Keating. Every one sat beaming, and fragrant
veils of smoke soon draped the room.

“Why do you call her 'Miss Sherwood'?” Boswell whispered in Keating's
ear.

“That's her name.”

“Ain't she the daughter of that old fellow over there by the window?
Ain't her name Fisbee?”

“No; she's his daughter, but her legal name's Sherwood; she's an
adop----”

“Great Scott! I know all about that. I'd like to know if there's a man,
woman, or child in this part of the country that doesn't. I guess it
won't be Fisbee or Sherwood either very long. She can easy get a new
name, _that_ lady! And if she took a fancy to Boswell, why, I'm a
bach----”

“I expect she won't take a fancy to Boswell very early,” said Keating.
“They say it will be Harkless.”

“Go 'way,” returned Mr. Boswell. “What do you want to say that for?
Can't you bear for anybody to be happy a minute or two, now and then?”

Warren Smith approached Helen and inquired if it would be asking too
much if they petitioned her for some music; so she went to the piano,
and sang some darky songs for them, with a quaint suggestion of the
dialect--two or three old-fashioned negro melodies of Foster's, followed
by some rollicking modern imitations with the movement and spirit of
a tinshop falling down a flight of stairs. Her audience listened in
delight from the first; but the latter songs quite overcame them with
pleasure and admiration, and before she finished, every head in the
room was jogging from side to side, and forward and back, in time to the
music, while every foot shuffled the measures on the carpet.

When the gentlemen from out of town discovered that it was time to leave
if they meant to catch their train, Helen called to them to wait, and
they gathered about her.

“Just one second,” she said, and she poured all the glasses full to the
brim; then, standing in the centre of the circle they made around her,
she said:

“Before you go, shan't we pledge each other to our success in this
good, home-grown Indiana cider, that leaves our heads clear and our arms
strong? If you will--then--” She began to blush furiously and her voice
trembled, but she lifted the glass high over her head and cried bravely,
“Here's to 'Our Candidate'!”

The big men, towering over her, threw back their heads and quaffed the
gentle liquor to the last drop. Then they sent up the first shout of the
campaign, and cheered John Harkless till the rafters rang.

“My friends,” said Mr. Keating, as he and Boswell and the men from
Gaines drove away in Judd Bennett's omnibus, “my friends, here is where
I begin the warmest hustling I ever did. I want Harkless, everybody
wants him----”

“It is a glorious idea,” said Mr. Bence. “The name of Harkless----”

Keating drowned the oratory. “But that isn't all. That little girl wants
him to go to Congress, and that settles it. He goes.”

That evening Minnie and her father were strolling up and down the front
walk together, between the flowered borders.

“Do you give up?” asked the judge.

“Give up what? No!” returned his daughter.

“She hasn't told you?”

“Not yet; she and Mr. Fisbee left for the office right after those men
went.”

“Haven't you discovered what the 'something about politics' she's doing
for him is? Did you understand what she meant by 'Our Candidate'?”

“Not exactly.”

“Did you see her blush when she proposed that toast?”

“Yes. So would anybody--with all those men, and their eyes hanging out
on their cheeks!”

“Pooh! She got up the whole show. Do you know why?”

“I only know it's politics.”

“Politics!” He glanced over his shoulder, and then, leaning toward her,
he said, in a low tone: “I'll tell you in confidence, Minnie; she's
sending him to Congress!”

“Ah!” she cried triumphantly. “If she loved him she wouldn't do _that_,
would she?”

“Minnie!” Briscoe turned upon her sternly. “I don't want to hear any
more talk like that. It's the way with some papers to jibe at our great
institutions, and you've been reading them; that's the trouble with you.
The only criticism any one has any business making against Congress is
that it's too good for some of the men we send there. Congress is our
great virtue, understand; the congressmen are our fault.”

“I didn't mean anything like that,” protested the girl. “I haven't been
reading any papers except the 'Herald.' I meant why should she send him
away if she cared about him?”

“She'll go with him.”

“They couldn't both go. What would become of the 'Herald'?”

“They'd fix that easy enough; there are plenty of smart young fellows in
Rouen they could get to run it while they are in Washington.”

“Mr. Harkless is sure to be elected, is he?”

“He is, if he's nominated.”

“Can't he get the nomination?”

“Get it! Nobody ever happened to think of him for it till it came into
_her_ head; and the only thing I look to see standing in the way of it
is Harkless himself; but I expect we can leave it to her to manage, and
I guess she will. She's got more diplomacy than Blaine. Kedge Halloway
is up the spout all right, but they want to keep it quiet; that's why
she had them come here instead of the office.”

“She wouldn't marry him a minute sooner because he went to Congress,”
 said Minnie thoughtfully.

“You're giving up,” he exclaimed. “You know I'm right.”

“Wait and see. It might--No, you're wrong as wrong can be! I wish you
weren't. Don't you see? You're blind. She _couldn't_ do all these
things for him if she loved him. That's the very proof itself. I suppose
you--well, you can't understand.”

“I'll tell you one thing,” he returned. “If she doesn't, the rest of it
won't amount to a rip with John Harkless.”

“Yes, it will. Nobody could help liking to find himself as big a man as
he'll be when he comes back here. Besides, don't you see, it's her way
of making it up to him for not liking him as much as he wants. _You_
give up, don't you?”

“No,” he cried, with feeble violence, “I don't. She'll find out some
things about herself when she sees him again.”

Minnie shook her head.

There was a sound of wheels; the buckboard drew up at the gate, and
Helen, returning from her evening's labor, jumped out lightly, and ran
around to pat the horses' heads. “Thank you so much, Mr. Willetts,” she
said to the driver. “I know you will handle the two delegates you are
to look after as well as you do the judge's team; and you ought to, you
know, because the delegates are men. You dears!” She stroked the sleek
necks of the colts and handed them bunches of grass.

Briscoe came out, and let the friendly animals nose his shoulder as he
looked gravely down on the piquant face beside him in the dusk. “Young
lady,” he said, “go East. Wait till we get on to Washington, and sit in
the gallery, and see John Harkless rise up in his place, and hear the
Speaker say: 'The Gentleman from Indiana!' I know the chills would go
up and down my spine, and I guess you'd feel pretty well paid for your
day's work. I guess we all would.”

“Aren't you tired, Helen?” asked Minnie, coming to her in the darkness
and clasping her waist.

“Tired? No; I'm happy. Did you ever see the stars so bright?”




CHAPTER XVIII. THE TREACHERY OF H. FISBEE

An Indiana town may lie asleep a long time, but there always comes a day
when it wakes up; and Plattville had wakened in August when the “Herald”
 became a daily and Eph Watts struck oil. It was then that history began
to be made. The “Herald” printed News, and the paper was sold every
morning at stands in all the towns in that section of the State. Its
circulation tripled. Parker talked of new presses; two men were added to
his staff, and a reporter was brought from Rouen to join Mr. Fisbee. The
“Herald” boomed the oil-field; people swarmed into town; the hotel was
crowded; strangers became no sensation whatever. A capitalist bought the
whole north side of the Square to erect new stores, and the Carlow Bank
began the construction of a new bank building of Bedford stone on Main
Street. Then it was whispered, next affirmed, that the “Herald” had
succeeded in another of its enterprises, and Main Street was to be
asphalted. That was the end of the “old days” of Plattville.

There was a man who had laid the foundation upon which the new
Plattville was to be built; he who, through the quiet labor of years,
had stamped his spirit upon the people, as their own was stamped upon
him; but he lay sick in his friend's house and did not care. One day
Meredith found him propped up in bed, reading a letter--reading it
listlessly, and with a dull eye.

“PLATTVILLE, _September 1st_.

“_Dear Mr. Harkless_: Yours of the 30th received. Every one here is very
glad to know that your health is so far improved as to admit of your
writing; and it is our strongest hope that you will soon be completely
recovered.

“New subscriptions are coming in at a slightly advanced rate since my
last letter; you will see they are distributed over several counties,
when you examine the books on your return; and I am glad to state that
with our arrangement for Gainesville the 'Herald' is now selling every
morning at a prominent store in all the towns within the radius we
determined on. Our plan of offering the daily with no advance on the
price of the former tri-weekly issue proves a success. I now propose
making the issue a quarto every day (at the same price) instead of once
a week. I think our experience warrants the experiment. It is my belief
that our present circulation will be increased forty per cent. Please
advise me if you approve. Of course this would mean a further increase
of our working force, and we should have to bring another man
from Rouen--possibly two more--but I think we need not fear such
enlargements.

“I should tell you that I have taken you at your word entrusting me
with the entire charge of your interests here, and I had the store-room
adjoining the office put in shape, and offered it to the telegraph
company for half the rent they were paying in their former quarters over
the post-office. They have moved in; and this, in addition to giving us
our despatches direct, is a reduction of expense.

“Mr. Watts informs me that the Standard's offer is liberal and the terms
are settled. The boom is not hollow, it is simply an awakening; and the
town, so long a dependent upon the impetus of agriculture or its trade,
is developing a prosperity of its own on other lines as well. Strangers
come every day; oil has lubricated every commercial joint. Contracts
have been let for three new brick business buildings to be erected on
the east side of the Square. The value of your Main Street frontage will
have doubled by December, and possibly you may see fit to tear away the
present building and put up another, instead; the investment might be
profitable. The 'Herald' could find room on the second and third floors,
and the first could be let to stores.

“I regret that you find your copy of the paper for the 29th overlooked
in the mail and that your messenger could find none for you at the
newspaper offices in Rouen. Mr. Schofield was given directions in regard
to supplying you with the missing issue at once.

“I fear that you may have had difficulty in deciphering some of my
former missives, as I was unfamiliar with the typewriter when I took
charge of the 'Herald'; however, I trust that you find my later letters
more legible.

“The McCune people are not worrying us; we are sure to defeat them. The
papers you speak of were found by Mr. Parker in your trunk, and are now
in my hands.

“I send with this a packet of communications and press clippings
indicative of the success of the daily, and in regard to other
innovations. The letters from women commendatory of our 'Woman's Page,'
thanking us for various house-keeping receipts, etc., strike me as
peculiarly interesting, as I admit that a 'Woman's Page' is always a
difficult matter for a man to handle without absurdity.

“Please do not think I mean to plume myself upon our various successes;
we attempted our innovations and enlargements at just the right time--a
time which you had ripened by years of work and waiting, and at the
moment when you had built up the reputation of the 'Herald' to its
highest point. Everything that has been done is successful only because
you paved the way, and because every one knows it is your paper; and the
people believe that whatever your paper does is interesting and right.

“Trusting that your recovery will be rapid, I am

“Yours truly,

“H. FISBEE.”

Harkless dropped the typewritten sheets with a sigh.

“I suppose I ought to get well,” he said wearily.

“Yes,” said Meredith, “I think you ought; but you're chock full of
malaria and fever and all kinds of meanness, and----”

“You 'tend to your own troubles,” returned the other, with an imitation
of liveliness. “I--I don't think it interests me much,” he said
querulously. He was often querulous of late, and it frightened Tom. “I'm
just tired. I am strong enough--that is, I think I am till I try to move
around, and then I'm like a log, and a lethargy gets me--that's it; I
don't think it's malaria; it's lethargy.”

“Lethargy comes from malaria.”

“It's the other way with me. I'd be all right if I only could get over
this--this tiredness. Let me have that pencil and pad, will you, please,
Tom?”

He set the pad on his knee, and began to write languidly:

                                        “ROUEN, _September 2d_.

“_Dear Mr. Fisbee_: Yours of the 1st to hand. I entirely approve all
arrangements you have made. I think you understand that I wish you to
regard _everything_ as in your own hands. You are the editor of the
'Herald' and have the sole responsibility for everything, including
policy, until, after proper warning, I relieve you in person. But until
that time comes, you must look upon me as a mere spectator. I do not
fear that you will make any mistakes; you have done very much better in
all matters than I could have done myself. At present I have only
one suggestion: I observe that your editorials concerning Halloway's
renomination are something lukewarm.

“It is very important that he be renominated, not altogether on account
of assuring his return to Washington (for he is no Madison, I fear), but
the fellow McCune must be so beaten that his defeat will be remembered
for twenty years. Halloway is honest and clean, at least, while McCune
is corrupt to the bone. He has been bought and sold, and I am glad the
proofs of it are in your hands, as you tell me Parker found them, as
directed, in my trunk, and gave them to you.

“The papers you hold drove him out of politics once, by the mere threat
of publication; you should have printed them last week, as I suggested.
Do so at once; the time is short. You have been too gentle; it has
the air of fearing to offend, and of catering, as if we were afraid of
antagonizing people against us; as though we had a personal stake in the
convention. Possibly you consider our subscription books as such; I do
not. But if they are, go ahead twice as hard. What if it does give the
enemy a weapon in case McCune is nominated; if he is (and I begin to
see a danger of it) we will be with the enemy. I do not carry my
partisanship so far as to help elect Mr. McCune to Congress. You have
been as non-committal in your editorials as if this were a fit time for
delicacy and the cheaper conception of party policy. My notion of party
policy--no new one--is that the party which considers the public
service before it considers itself will thrive best in the long run. The
'Herald' is a little paper (not so little nowadays, after all, thanks to
you), but it is an honest one, and it isn't afraid of Rod McCune and his
friends. He is to be beaten, understand, if we have to send him to the
penitentiary on an old issue to do it. And if the people wish to believe
us cruel or vengeful, let them. Please let me see as hearty a word as
you can say for Halloway, also. You can write with ginger; please show
some in this matter.

“My condition is improved.

                    “I am, very truly yours,

                                          “JOHN HARKLESS.”

When the letter was concluded, he handed it to Meredith. “Please address
that, put a 'special' on it, and send it, Tom. It should go at once, so
as to reach him by to-night.”

“H. Fisbee?”

“Yes; H. Fisbee.”

“I believe it does you good to write, boy,” said the other, as he bent
over him. “You look more chirrupy than you have for several days.”

“It's that beast, McCune; young Fisbee is rather queer about it, and
I felt stirred up as I went along.” But even before the sentence was
finished the favor of age and utter weariness returned, and the dark
lids closed over his eyes. They opened again, slowly, and he took the
others hand and looked up at him mournfully, but as it were his soul
shone forth in dumb and eloquent thanks.

“I--I'm giving you a jolly summer, Tom,” he said, with a quivering
effort to smile. “Don't you think I am? I don't--I don't know what I
should have--done----”

“You old Indian!” said Meredith, tenderly.

Three days later, Tom was rejoiced by symptoms of invigoration in his
patient. A telegram came for Harkless, and Meredith, bringing it into
the sick room, was surprised to find the occupant sitting straight up on
his couch without the prop of pillows. He was reading the day's copy of
the “Herald,” and his face was flushed and his brow stern.

“What's the matter, boy?”

“Mismanagement, I hope,” said the other, in a strong voice. “Worse,
perhaps. It's this young Fisbee. I can't think what's come over the
fellow. I thought he was a rescuing angel, and he's turning out bad.
I'll swear it looks like they'd been--well, I won't say that yet. But
he hasn't printed that McCune business I told you of, and he's had two
days. There is less than a week before the convention, and--” He broke
off, seeing the yellow envelope in Meredith's hand. “Is that a telegram
for me?” His companion gave it to him. He tore it open and read the
contents. They were brief and unhappy.

“Can't you do something? Can't you come down? It begins to look the
other way.

“K. H.”


“It's from Halloway,” said John. “I have got to go. What did that doctor
say?”

“He said two weeks at the earliest, or you'll run into typhoid and
complications from your hurts, and even pleasanter things than that.
I've got you here, and here you stay; so lie back and get easy, boy.”

“Then give me that pad and pencil.” He rapidly dashed off a note to H.
Fisbee:

“_September 5th_.

“H. FISBEE,

“Editor 'Carlow Herald.'

“_Dear Sir_: You have not acknowledged my letter of the 2d September by
a note (which should have reached me the following morning), or by
the alteration in the tenor of my columns which I requested, or by the
publication of the McCune papers which I directed. In this I hold you
grossly at fault. If you have a conscientious reason for refusing to
carry out my request it should have been communicated to me at once,
as should the fact--if such be the case--that you are a personal (or
impersonal, if you like) friend of Mr. Rodney McCune. Whatever the
motive, ulterior or otherwise, which prevents you from operating my
paper as I direct, I should have been informed of it. This is a matter
vital to the interests of our community, and you have hitherto shown
yourself too alert in accepting my slightest suggestion for me to
construe this failure as negligence. Negligence I might esteem as at
least honest and frank; your course has been neither the one nor the
other.

“You will receive this letter by seven this evening by special delivery.
You will print the facts concerning McCune in to-morrow morning's paper.

“I am well aware of the obligations under which your extreme efficiency
and your thoughtfulness in many matters have placed me. It is to you I
owe my unearned profits from the transaction in oil, and it is to you
I owe the 'Herald's' extraordinary present circulation, growth of power
and influence. That power is still under my direction, and is an added
responsibility which shall not be misapplied.

“You must forgive me if I write too sharply. You see I have failed to
understand your silence; and if I wrong you I heartily ask your pardon
in advance of your explanation. Is it that you are sorry for McCune? It
would be a weak pity that could keep you to silence. I warned him long
ago that the papers you hold would be published if he ever tried to
return to political life, and he is deliberately counting on my physical
weakness and absence. Let him rely upon it; I am not so weak as he
thinks. Personally, I cannot say that I dislike Mr. McCune. I have found
him a very entertaining fellow; it is said he is the best of husbands,
and a friend to some of his friends, and, believe me, I am sorry for him
from the bottom of my heart. But the 'Herald' is not.

“You need not reply by letter. To-morrow's issue answers for you. Until
I have received a copy, I withhold my judgment.

“JOHN HARKLESS.”

The morrow's issue--that fateful print on which depended John Harkless's
opinion of H. Fisbee's integrity--contained an editorial addressed
to the delegates of the convention, warning them to act for the vital
interest of the community, and declaring that the opportunity to be
given them in the present convention was a rare one, a singular piece of
good fortune indeed; they were to have the chance to vote for a man who
had won the love and respect of every person in the district--one who
had suffered for his championship of righteousness--one whom even his
few political enemies confessed they held in personal affection and
esteem--one who had been the inspiration of a new era--one whose life
had been helpfulness, whose hand had reached out to every struggler
and unfortunate--a man who had met and faced danger for the sake of
others--one who lived under a threat for years, and who had been almost
overborne in the fulfilment of that threat, but who would live to see
the sun shine on his triumph, the tribute the convention would bring
him as a gift from a community that loved him. His name needed not to be
told; it was on every lip that morning, and in every heart.

Tom was eagerly watching his companion as he read. Harkless fell back
on the pillows with a drawn face, and for a moment he laid his thin hand
over his eyes in a gesture of intense pain.

“What is it?” Meredith said quickly.

“Give me the pad, please.”

“What is it, boy?”

The other's teeth snapped together.

“What is it?” he cried. “What is it? It's treachery, and the worst I
ever knew. Not a word of the accusation I demanded--lying _praises_
instead! Read that editorial--there, _there_!” He struck the page
with the back of his hand, and threw the paper to Meredith. “Read that
miserable lie! 'One who has won the love and respect of every person
in the district!'--'One who has suffered for his championship of
righteousness!' _Righteousness!_ Save the mark!”

“What does it mean?”

“Mean! It means McCune--Rod McCune, 'who has lived under a threat for
years'--_my_ threat! I swore I would print him out of Indiana if he ever
raised his head again, and he knew I could. 'Almost overborne in the
fulfilment of that threat!' _Almost_! It's a black scheme, and I see it
now. This man came to Plattville and went on the 'Herald' for nothing
in the world but this. It's McCune's hand all along. He daren't name
him even now, the coward! The trick lies between McCune and young
Fisbee--the old man is innocent. Give me the pad. Not _almost_
overborne. There are three good days to work in, and, by the gods
of Perdition, if Rod McCune sees Congress it will be in his next
incarnation!”

He rapidly scribbled a few lines on the pad, and threw the sheets to
Meredith. “Get those telegrams to the Western Union office in a rush,
please. Read them first.”

With a very red face Tom read them. One was addressed to H. Fisbee:

“You are relieved from the cares of editorship. You will turn over the
management of the 'Herald' to Warren Smith. You will give him the McCune
papers. If you do not, or if you destroy them, you cannot hide where I
shall not find you.

                                    “JOHN HARKLESS.”

The second was to Warren Smith: “Take possession 'Herald.' Dismiss H.
Fisbee. This your authority. Publish McCune papers so labelled which H.
Fisbee will hand you. Letter follows. Beat McCune.

                                    “JOHN HARKLESS.”

The author of the curt epistles tossed restlessly on his couch, but
the reader of them stared, incredulous and dumfounded, uncertain of
his command of gravity. His jaw fell, and his open mouth might have
betokened a being smit to imbecility; and, haply, he might be, for Helen
had written him from Plattville, pledging his honor to secrecy with the
first words, and it was by her command that he had found excuses for
not supplying his patient with all the papers which happened to contain
references to the change of date for the Plattville convention. And
Meredith had known for some time where James Fisbee had found a “young
relative” to be the savior of the “Herald” for his benefactor's sake.

“You mean--you--intend to--you discharge young Fisbee?” he stammered at
last.

“Yes! Let me have the answers the instant they come, will you, Tom?”
 Then Harkless turned his face from the wall and spoke through his teeth:
“I mean to see H. Fisbee before many days; I want to talk to him!”

But, though he tossed and fretted himself into what the doctor
pronounced a decidedly improved state, no answer came to either telegram
that day or night. The next morning a messenger boy stumbled up the
front steps and handed the colored man, Jim, four yellow envelopes,
night messages. Three of them were for Harkless, one was for Meredith.
Jim carried them upstairs, left the three with his master's guest, then
knocked on his master's door.

“What is it?” answered a thick voice. Meredith had not yet risen.

“A telegraph. Mist' Tawm.”

There was a terrific yawn. “O-o-oh! Slide it--oh--under the--door.”

“Yessuh.”

Meredith lay quite without motion for several minutes, sleepily watching
the yellow rhomboid in the crevice. It was a hateful looking thing to
come mixing in with pleasant dreams and insist upon being read. After a
while he climbed groaningly out of bed, and read the message with heavy
eyes, still half asleep. He read it twice before it penetrated:

“Suppress all newspapers to-day. Convention meets at eleven. If we
succeed a delegation will come to Rouen this afternoon. They will come.

                                          “HELEN.”


Tom rubbed his sticky eyelids, and shook his head violently in a Spartan
effort to rouse himself; but what more effectively performed the task
for him were certain sounds issuing from Harkless's room, across the
hall. For some minutes, Meredith had been dully conscious of a rustle
and stir in the invalid's chamber, and he began to realize that no mere
tossing about a bed would account for a noise that reached him across
a wide hall and through two closed doors of thick walnut. Suddenly he
heard a quick, heavy tread, shod, in Harkless's room, and a resounding
bang, as some heavy object struck the floor. The doctor was not to come
till evening; Jim had gone down-stairs. Who wore shoes in the sick
man's room? He rushed across the hall in his pyjamas and threw open the
unlocked door.

The bed was disarranged and vacant. Harkless, fully dressed, was
standing in the middle of the floor, hurling garments at a big
travelling bag.

The horrified Meredith stood for a second, bleached and speechless, then
he rushed upon his friend and seized him with both hands.

“Mad, by heaven! Mad!”

“Let go of me, Tom!”

“Lunatic! Lunatic!”

“Don't stop me one instant!”

Meredith tried to force him toward the bed. “For mercy's sake, get back
to bed. You're delirious, boy!”

“Delirious nothing. I'm a well man.”

“Go to bed--go to bed.”

Harkless set him out of the way with one arm. “Bed be hanged!” he cried.
“I'm going to Plattville!”

Meredith wrung his hands. “The doctor----“!

“Doctor be damned!”

“Will you tell me what has happened, John?”

His companion slung a light overcoat, unfolded, on the overflowing,
misshapen bundle of clothes that lay in the bag; then he jumped on the
lid with both feet and kicked the hasp into the lock; a very elegantly
laundered cuff and white sleeve dangling out from between the fastened
lids. “I haven't one second to talk, Tom; I have seventeen minutes to
catch the express, and it's a mile and a half to the station; the train
leaves here at eight fifty, I get to Plattville at ten forty-seven.
Telephone for a cab for me, please, or tell me the number; I don't want
to stop to hunt it up.”

Meredith looked him in the eyes. In the pupils of Harkless flared a
fierce light. His cheeks were reddened with an angry, healthy glow, and
his teeth were clenched till the line of his jaw stood out like that
of an embattled athlete in sculpture; his brow was dark; his chest was
thrown out, and he took deep, quick breaths; his shoulders were squared,
and in spite of his thinness they looked massy. Lethargy, or malaria, or
both, whatever were his ailments, they were gone. He was six feet of hot
wrath and cold resolution.

Tom said: “You are going?”

“Yes,” he answered, “I am going.”

“Then I will go with you.”

“Thank you, Tom,” said the other quietly.

Meredith ran into his own room, pressed an electric button, sprang out
of his pyjamas like Aphrodite from the white sea-foam, and began to dive
into his clothes with a panting rapidity astonishingly foreign to his
desire. Jim appeared in the doorway.

“The cart, Jim,” shouted his master. “We want it like lightning. Tell
the cook to give Mr. Harkless his breakfast in a hurry. Set a cup of
coffee on the table by the front door for me. Run like the deuce! We've
got to catch a train.--That will be quicker than any cab,” he explained
to Harkless. “We'll break the ordinance against fast driving, getting
down there.”

Ten minutes later the cart swept away from the house at a gait which
pained the respectable neighborhood. The big horse plunged through the
air, his ears laid flat toward his tail; the cart careened sickeningly;
the face of the servant clutching at the rail in the rear was smeared
with pallor as they pirouetted around curves on one wheel--to him it
seemed they skirted the corners and Death simultaneously--and the speed
of their going made a strong wind in their faces.

Harkless leaned forward.

“Can you make it a little faster, Tom?” he said.

They dashed up to the station amid the cries of people flying to the
walls for safety; the two gentlemen leaped from the cart, bore down upon
the ticket-office, stormed at the agent, and ran madly at the gates,
flourishing their passports. The official on duty eyed them wearily, and
barred the way.

“Been gone two minutes,” he remarked, with a peaceable yawn.

Harkless stamped his foot on the cement flags; then he stood stock
still, gazing at the empty tracks; but Meredith turned to him, smiling.

“Won't it keep?” he asked.

“Yes, it will keep,” John answered. “Part of it may have to keep till
election day, but some of it I will settle before night. And that,” he
cried, between his teeth, “and that is the part of it in regard to young
Mr. Fisbee!”

“Oh, it's about H. Fisbee, is it?”

“Yes, it's H. Fisbee.”

“Well, we might as well go up and see what the doctor thinks of you;
there's no train.”

“I don't want to see a doctor again, ever--as long as I live. I'm as
well as anybody.”

Tom burst out laughing, and clapped his companion lightly on the
shoulder, his eyes dancing with pleasure.

“Upon my soul,” he cried, “I believe you are! It's against all my
tradition, and I see I am the gull of poetry; for I've always believed
it to be beyond question that this sort of miracle was wrought, not by
rage, but by the tenderer senti--” Tom checked himself. “Well, let's
take a drive.”

“Meredith,” said the other, turning to him gravely, “you may think me a
fool, if you will, and it's likely I am; but I don't leave this station
except by train. I've only two days to work in, and every minute lessens
our chances to beat McCune, and I have to begin by wasting time on a
tussle with a traitor. There's another train at eleven fifty-five; I
don't take any chances on missing that one.”

“Well, well,” laughed his friend, pushing him good-humoredly toward a
door by a red and white striped pillar, “we'll wait here, if you like;
but at least go in there and get a shave; it's a clean shop. You want to
look your best if you are going down to fight H. Fisbee.”

“Take these, then, and you will understand,” said Harkless; and
he thrust his three telegrams of the morning into Tom's hand and
disappeared into the barber-shop. When he was gone, Meredith went to the
telegraph office in the station, and sent a line over the wire to Helen:

“Keep your delegation at home. He's coming on the 11.55.”

Then he read the three telegrams Harkless had given him. They were all
from Plattville:

“Sorry cannot oblige. Present incumbent tenacious. Unconditionally
refuses surrender. Delicate matter. No hope for K. H. But don't worry.
Everything all right.

                                             “WARREN SMITH.”


“Harkless, if you have the strength to walk, come down before the
convention. Get here by 10.47. Looks bad. Come if it kills you.

                                             “K. H.”

“You entrusted me with sole responsibility for all matters pertaining
to 'Herald.' Declared yourself mere spectator. Does this permit your
interfering with my policy for the paper? Decline to consider any
proposition to relieve me of my duties without proper warning and
allowance of time.

                                             “H. FISBEE.”




CHAPTER XIX. THE GREAT HARKLESS COMES HOME

The accommodation train wandered languidly through the early afternoon
sunshine, stopping at every village and almost every country post-office
on the line; the engine toot-tooting at the road crossings; and, now and
again, at such junctures, a farmer, struggling with a team of prancing
horses, would be seen, or, it might be, a group of school children,
homeward bound from seats of learning. At each station, when the train
came to a stand-still, some passenger, hanging head and elbows out of
his window, like a quilt draped over a chair, would address a citizen on
the platform:

“Hey, Sam, how's Miz Bushkirk?”

“She's wal.”

“Where's Milt, this afternoon?”

“Warshing the buggy.” Then at the cry, “All 'board”--“See you Sunday
over at Amo.”

“You make Milt come. I'll be there, shore. So long.”

There was an impatient passenger in the smoker, who found the stoppages
at these wayside hamlets interminable, both in frequency and in the
delay at each of them; and while the dawdling train remained inert, and
the moments passed inactive, his eyes dilated and his hand clenched till
the nails bit his palm; then, when the trucks groaned and the wheels
crooned against the rails once more, he sank back in his seat with
sighs of relief. Sometimes he would get up and pace the aisle until his
companion reminded him that this was not certain to hasten the hour of
their arrival at their destination.

“I know that,” answered the other, “but I've got to beat McCune.”

“By the way,” observed Meredith, “you left your stick behind.”

“You don't think I need a club to face----”

Tom choked. “Oh, no. I wasn't thinking of your giving H. Fisbee a
thrashing. I meant to lean on.”

“I don't want it. I've got to walk lame all my life, but I'm not going
to hobble on a stick.” Tom looked at him sadly; for it was true, and the
Cross-Roaders might hug themselves in their cells over the thought. For
the rest of his life John Harkless was to walk with just the limp they
themselves would have had, if, as in former days, their sentence had
been to the ball and chain.

The window was open beside the two young men, and the breeze swept in,
fresh from the wide fields, There was a tang in the air; it soothed like
a balm, but there was a spur to energy and heartiness in its crispness,
the wholesome touch of fall. John looked out over the boundless aisles
of corn that stood higher than a tall man could reach; long waves
rippled across them. Here, where the cry of the brave had rung in forest
glades, where the painted tribes had hastened, were marshalled the
tasselled armies of peace. And beyond these, where the train ran between
shadowy groves, delicate landscape vistas, framed in branches, opened,
closed, and succeeded each other, and then the travellers were carried
out into the level open again, and the intensely blue September skies
ran down to the low horizon, meeting the tossing plumes of corn.

It takes a long time for the full beauty of the flat lands to reach a
man's soul; once there, nor hills, nor sea, nor growing fan leaves of
palm shall suffice him. It is like the beauty in the word “Indiana.” It
may be that there are people who do not consider “Indiana” a beautiful
word; but once it rings true in your ears it has a richer sound than
“Vallombrosa.”

There was a newness in the atmosphere that day, a bright invigoration,
that set the blood tingling. The hot months were done with, languor was
routed. Autumn spoke to industry, told of the sowing of another harvest,
of the tawny shock, of the purple grape, of the red apple, and called
upon muscle and laughter; breathed gaiety into men's hearts. The little
stations hummed with bustle and noise; big farm wagons rattled away and
raced with cut-under or omnibus; people walked with quick steps; the
baggage-masters called cheerily to the trainmen, and the brakemen
laughed good-bys to rollicking girls.

As they left Gainesville three children, clad in calico, barefoot and
bareheaded, came romping out of a log cabin on the outskirts of the
town, and waved their hands to the passengers. They climbed on the
sagging gate in front of their humble domain, and laughed for joy to see
the monstrous caravan come clattering out of the unknown, bearing the
faces by. The smallest child, a little cherubic tow-head, whose cheeks
were smeared with clean earth and the tracks of forgotten tears, stood
upright on a fence-post, and blew the most impudent of kisses to the
strangers on a journey.

Beyond this they came into a great plain, acres and acres of green
rag-weed where the wheat had grown, all so flat one thought of an
enormous billiard table, and now, where the railroad crossed the country
roads, they saw the staunch brown thistle, sometimes the sumach,
and always the graceful iron-weed, slender, tall, proud, bowing a
purple-turbaned head, or shaking in an agony of fright when it stood
too close to the train. The fields, like great, flat emeralds set in
new metal, were bordered with golden-rod, and at sight of this the heart
leaped; for the golden-rod is a symbol of stored granaries, of ripe
sheaves, of the kindness of the season generously given and abundantly
received; more, it is the token of a land of promise and of bounteous
fulfilment; and the plant stains its blossom with yellow so that when it
falls it pays tribute to the ground which has nourished it.

From the plain they passed again into a thick wood, where ruddy arrows
of the sun glinted among the boughs; and, here and there, one saw a
courtly maple or royal oak wearing a gala mantle of crimson and
pale brown, gallants of the forest preparing early for the October
masquerade, when they should hold wanton carnival, before they stripped
them of their finery for pious gray.

And when the coughing engine drew them to the borders of this wood, they
rolled out into another rich plain of green and rust-colored corn; and
far to the south John Harkless marked a winding procession of sycamores,
which, he knew, followed the course of a slender stream; and the waters
of the stream flowed by a bank where wild thyme might have grown, and
where, beyond an orchard and a rose-garden, a rustic bench was placed in
the shade of the trees; and the name of the stream was Hibbard's Creek.
Here the land lay flatter than elsewhere; the sky came closer, with a
gentler benediction; the breeze blew in, laden with keener spices;
there was the flavor of apples and the smell of the walnut and a hint
of coming frost; the immeasurable earth lay more patiently to await the
husbandman; and the whole world seemed to extend flat in line with the
eye--for this was Carlow County.

All at once the anger ran out of John Harkless; he was a hard man for
anger to tarry with. And in place of it a strong sense of home-coming
began to take possession of him. He was going home. “Back to Plattville,
where I belong,” he had said; and he said it again without bitterness,
for it was the truth. “Every man cometh to his own place in the end.”

Yes, as one leaves a gay acquaintance of the playhouse lobby for
some hard-handed, tried old friend, so he would wave the outer world
God-speed and come back to the old ways of Carlow. What though the years
were dusty, he had his friends and his memories and his old black brier
pipe. He had a girl's picture that he should carry in his heart till his
last day; and if his life was sadder, it was infinitely richer for it.
His winter fireside should be not so lonely for her sake; and losing
her, he lost not everything, for he had the rare blessing of having
known her. And what man could wish to be healed of such a hurt? Far
better to have had it than to trot a smug pace unscathed.

He had been a dullard; he had lain prostrate in the wretchedness of his
loss. “A girl you could put in your hat--and there you have a strong
man prone.” He had been a sluggard, weary of himself, unfit to fight, a
failure in life and a failure in love. That was ended; he was tired of
failing, and it was time to succeed for a while. To accept the worst
that Fate can deal, and to wring courage from it instead of despair,
that is success; and it was the success that he would have. He would
take Fate by the neck. But had it done him unkindness? He looked out
over the beautiful, “monotonous” landscape, and he answered heartily,
“No!” There was ignorance in man, but no unkindness; were man utterly
wise he were utterly kind. The Cross-Roaders had not known better; that
was all.

The unfolding aisles of corn swam pleasantly before John's eyes. The
earth hearkened to man's wants and answered; the clement sun and summer
rains hastened the fruition. Yonder stood the brown haystack, garnered
to feed the industrious horse who had earned his meed; there was the
straw-thatched shelter for the cattle. How the orchard boughs bent with
their burdens! The big red barns stood stored with the harvested wheat;
and, beyond the pasture-lands, tall trees rose against the benign sky to
feed the glance of a dreamer; the fertile soil lay lavender and glossy
in the furrow. The farmhouses were warmly built and hale and strong; no
winter blast should rage so bitterly as to shake them, or scatter the
hospitable embers on the hearth. For this was Carlow County, and he was
coming home.

They crossed a by-road. An old man with a streaky gray chin-beard was
sitting on a sack of oats in a seatless wagon, waiting for the train to
pass. Harkless seized his companion excitedly by the elbow.

“Tommy!” he cried. “It's Kim Fentriss--look! Did you see that old
fellow?”

“I saw a particularly uninterested and uninteresting gentleman sitting
on a bag,” replied his friend.

“Why, that's old Kimball Fentriss. He's going to town; he lives on the
edge of the county.”

“Can this be true?” said Meredith gravely.

“I wonder,” said Harkless thoughtfully, a few moments later, “I wonder
why he had them changed around.”

“Who changed around?”

“The team. He always used to drive the bay on the near side, and the
sorrel on the off.”

“And at present,” rejoined Meredith, “I am to understand that he is
driving the sorrel on the near side, and bay on the off?”

“That's it,” returned the other. “He must have worked them like that for
some time, because they didn't look uneasy. They're all right about the
train, those two. I've seen them stand with their heads almost against
a fast freight. See there!” He pointed to a white frame farmhouse with
green blinds. “That's Win Hibbard's. We're just outside of Beaver.”

“Beaver? Elucidate Beaver, boy!”

“Beaver? Meredith, your information ends at home. What do you know of
your own State if you are ignorant of Beaver. Beaver is that city of
Carlow County next in importance and population to Plattville.”

Tom put his head out of the window. “I fancy you are right,” he said. “I
already see five people there.”

Meredith had observed the change in his companion's mood. He had watched
him closely all day, looking for a return of his malady; but he came
to the conclusion that in truth a miracle had been wrought, for the
lethargy was gone, and vigor seemed to increase in Harkless with every
turn of the wheels that brought them nearer Plattville; and the nearer
they drew to Plattville the higher the spirits of both the young men
rose. Meredith knew what was happening there, and he began to be a
little excited. As he had said, there were five people visible at
Beaver; and he wondered where they lived, as the only building in sight
was the station, and to satisfy his curiosity he walked out to the
vestibule. The little station stood in deep woods, and brown leaves
whirled along the platform. One of the five people was an old lady, and
she entered a rear car. The other four were men. One of them handed the
conductor a telegram.

Meredith heard the official say, “All right. Decorate ahead. I'll hold
it five minutes.”

The man sprang up the steps of the smoker and looked in. He turned
to Meredith: “Do you know if that gentleman in the gray coat is Mr.
Harkless? He's got his back this way, and I don't want to go inside.
The--the air in a smoker always gives me a spell.”

“Yes, that's Mr. Harkless.”

The man jumped to the platform. “All right, boys,” he said. “Rip her
out.”

The doors of the freight-room were thrown open, and a big bundle of
colored stuffs was dragged out and hastily unfolded. One of the men
ran to the further end of the car with a strip of red, white and blue
bunting, and tacked it securely, while another fastened the other
extremity to the railing of the steps by Meredith. The two companions of
this pair performed the same operation with another strip on the other
side of the car. They ran similar strips of bunting along the roof from
end to end, so that, except for the windows, the car was completely
covered by the national colors. Then they draped the vestibules with
flags. It was all done in a trice.

Meredith's heart was beating fast. “What's it all about?” he asked.

“Picnic down the line,” answered the man in charge, removing a tack from
his mouth. He motioned to the conductor, “Go ahead.”

The wheels began to move; the decorators remained on the platform,
letting the train pass them; but Meredith, craning his neck from the
steps, saw that they jumped on the last car.

“What's the celebration?” asked Harkless, when Meredith returned.

“Picnic down the line,” said Meredith.

“Nipping weather for a picnic; a little cool, don't you think? One of
those fellows looked like a friend of mine. Homer Tibbs, or as Homer
might look if he were in disgrace. He had his hat hung on his eyes, and
he slouched like a thief in melodrama, as he tacked up the bunting
on this side of the car.” He continued to point out various familiar
places, finally breaking out enthusiastically, as they drew nearer the
town, “Hello! Look there--beyond the grove yonder! See that house?”

“Yes, John.”

“That's the Bowlders'. You've got to know the Bowlders.”

“I'd like to.”

“The kindest people in the world. The Briscoe house we can't see,
because it's so shut in by trees; and, besides, it's a mile or so ahead
of us. We'll go out there for supper to-night. Don't you like Briscoe?
He's the best they make. We'll go up town with Judd Bennett in the
omnibus, and you'll know how a rapid-fire machine gun sounds. I want
to go straight to the 'Herald' office,” he finished, with a suddenly
darkening brow.

“After all, there may be some explanation,” Meredith suggested, with a
little hesitancy. “H. Fisbee might turn out more honest than you think.”

Harkless threw his head back and laughed; it was the first time Meredith
had heard him laugh since the night of the dance in the country.
“Honest! A man in the pay of Rodney McCune! Well, we can let it wait
till we get there. Listen! There's the whistle that means we're getting
near home. By heaven, there's an oil-well!”

“So it is.”

“And another--three--five--seven--seven in sight at once! They tried it
three miles south and failed; but you can't fool Eph Watts, bless him! I
want you to know Watts.”

They were running by the outlying houses of the town, amidst a thousand
descriptive exclamations from Harkless, who wished Meredith to meet
every one in Carlow. But he came to a pause in the middle of a word.

“Do you hear music?” he asked abruptly. “Or is it only the rhythm of the
ties?”

“It seems to me there's music in the air,” answered his companion. “I've
been fancying I heard it for a minute or so. There! No--yes. It's a
band, isn't it?”

“No; what would a band----”

The train slowed up, and stopped at a watertank, two hundred yards east
of the station, and their uncertainty was at an end.

From somewhere down the track came the detonating boom of a cannon.
There was a dash of brass, and the travellers became aware of a band
playing “Marching through Georgia.” Meredith laid his hand on his
companion's shoulder. “John,” he said, “John----” The cannon fired
again, and there came a cheer from three thousand throats, the shouters
all unseen.

The engine coughed and panted, the train rolled on, and in another
minute it had stopped alongside the station in the midst of a
riotous jam of happy people, who were waving flags and banners and
handkerchiefs, and tossing their hats high in the air, and shouting
themselves hoarse. The band played in dumb show; it could not hear
itself play. The people came at the smoker like a long wave, and Warren
Smith, Briscoe, Keating, and Mr. Bence of Gaines were swept ahead of
it. Before the train stopped they had rushed eagerly up the steps and
entered the car.

Harkless was on his feet and started to meet them. He stopped.

“What does it mean?” he said, and began to grow pale. “Is Halloway--did
McCune--have you----”

Warren Smith seized one of his hands and Briscoe the other. “What does
it mean?” cried Warren; “it means that you were nominated for Congress
at five minutes after one-o'clock this afternoon.”

“On the second ballot,” shouted the Judge, “just as young Fisbee planned
it, weeks ago.”


It was one of the great crowds of Carlow's history. They had known since
morning that he was coming home, and the gentlemen of the Reception
Committee had some busy hours; but long before the train arrived,
everything was ready. Homer Tibbs had done his work well at Beaver, and
the gray-haired veterans of a battery Carlow had sent out in '61 had
placed their worn old gun in position to fire salutes. At one-o'clock,
immediately after the nomination had been made unanimous, the Harkless
Clubs of Carlow, Amo, and Gaines, secretly organized during the quiet
agitation preceding the convention, formed on parade in the court-house
yard, and, with the Plattville Band at their head, paraded the streets
to the station, to make sure of being on hand when the train arrived--it
was due in a couple of hours. There they were joined by an increasing
number of glad enthusiasts, all noisy, exhilarated, red-faced with
shouting, and patriotically happy. As Mr. Bence, himself the spoiled
child of another county, generously said, in a speech, which (with no
outrageous pressure) he was induced to make during the long wait:
“The favorite son of Carlow is returning to his Lares and Penates like
another Cincinnatus accepting the call of the people; and, for the first
time in sixteen years, Carlow shall have a representative to bear the
banner of this district and the flaming torch of Progress sweeping on to
Washington and triumph like a speedy galleon of old. And his friends are
here to take his hand and do him homage, and the number of his friends
is as the number given in the last census of the population of the
counties of this district!”

And, indeed, in this estimate the speaker seemed guilty of no great
exaggeration. A never intermittent procession of pedestrians and
vehicles made its way to the station; and every wagon, buckboard, buggy,
and cut-under had its flags or bunting, or streamer of ribbons tied to
the whip. The excitement increased as the time grew shorter; those
on foot struggled for better positions, and the people in wagons
and carriages stood upon seats, while the pedestrians besieged them,
climbing on the wheels, or balancing recklessly, with feet on the hubs
of opposite wagons. Everybody was bound to see _him_. When the whistle
announced the coming of the train, the band began to play, the cannon
fired, horns blew, and the cheering echoed and reechoed till heaven's
vault resounded with the noise the people of Carlow were making.

There was one heart which almost stopped beating. Helen was standing on
the front seat of the Briscoe buckboard, with Minnie beside her, and, at
the commotion, the horses pranced and backed so that Lige Willetts ran
to hold them; but she did not notice the frightened roans, nor did she
know that Minnie clutched her round the waist to keep her from falling.
Her eyes were fixed intently on the smoke of the far-away engine, and
her hand, lifted to her face in an uncertain, tremulous fashion, as it
was one day in a circus tent, pressed against the deepest blush that
ever mantled a girl's cheek. When the train reached the platform, she
saw Briscoe and the others rush into the car, and there ensued what
was to her an almost intolerable pause of expectation, while the crowd
besieged the windows of the smoker, leaning up and climbing on each
other's shoulders to catch the first glimpse of _him_. Briscoe and a
red-faced young man, a stranger to Plattville, came down the steps,
laughing like boys, and then Keating and Bence, and then Warren Smith.
As the lawyer reached the platform, he turned toward the door of the car
and waved his hand as in welcome.

“Here he is, boys!” he shouted, “Welcome Home!” At that it was as if
all the noise that had gone before had been mere leakage of pent-up
enthusiasm. A thousand horns blared deafeningly, the whistles of the
engine and of Hibbard's mill were added to the din, the court-house bell
was pealing out a welcome, and the church bells were ringing, the cannon
thundered, and then cheer on cheer shook the air, as John Harkless came
out under the flags, and passed down the steps of the car.

When Helen saw him, over the heads of the people and through a flying
tumult of flags and hats and handkerchiefs, she gave one frightened
glance about her, and jumped down from her high perch, and sank into the
back seat of the buckboard with her burning face turned from the station
and her eyes fixed on the ground. She wanted to run away, as she had run
from him the first time she had ever seen him. Then, as now, he came
in triumph, hailed by the plaudits of his fellows; and now, as on that
long-departed day of her young girlhood, he was borne high over the
heads of the people, for Minnie cried to her to look; they were carrying
him on their shoulders to his carriage. She had had only that brief
glimpse of him, before he was lost in the crowd that was so glad to get
him back again and so proud of him; but she had seen that he looked very
white and solemn.

Briscoe and Tom Meredith made their way through the crowd, and climbed
into the buckboard. “All right, Lige,” called the judge to Willetts, who
was at the horses' heads. “You go get into line with the boys; they want
you. We'll go down on Main Street to see the parade,” he explained to
the ladies, gathering the reins in his hand.

He clucked to the roans, and by dint of backing and twisting and turning
and a hundred intricate manoeuvres, accompanied by entreaties
and remonstrances and objurgations, addressed to the occupants of
surrounding vehicles, he managed to extricate the buckboard from the
press; and once free, the team went down the road toward Main Street
at a lively gait. The judge's call to the colts rang out cheerily; his
handsome face was one broad smile. “This is a big day for Carlow,” he
said; “I don't remember a better day's work in twenty years.”

“Did you tell him about Mr. Halloway?” asked Helen, leaning forward
anxiously.

“Warren told him before we left the car,” answered Briscoe. “He'd have
declined on the spot, I expect, if we hadn't made him sure it was all
right with Kedge.”

“If I understood what Mr. Smith was saying, Halloway must have behaved
very well,” said Meredith.

The judge laughed. “He saw it was the only way to beat McCune, and he'd
have given his life and Harkless's, too, rather than let McCune have
it.”

“Why didn't you stay with him, Tom?” asked Helen.

“With Halloway? I don't know him.”

“One forgives a generous hilarity anything, even such quips as that,”
 she retorted. “Why did you not stay with Mr. Harkless?”

“That's very hospitable of you,” laughed the young man. “You forget that
I have the felicity to sit at your side. Judge Briscoe has been kind
enough to ask me to review the procession from his buckboard and to sup
at his house with other distinguished visitors, and I have accepted.”

“But didn't he wish you to remain with him?”

“But this second I had the honor to inform you that I am here distinctly
by his invitation.”

“_His_?”

“Precisely, his. Judge Briscoe, Miss Sherwood will not believe that you
desire my presence. If I intrude, pray let me--” He made as if to spring
from the buckboard, and the girl seized his arm impatiently.

“You are a pitiful nonsense-monger!” she cried; and for some reason
this speech made him turn his glasses upon her gravely. Her lashes fell
before his gaze, and at that he took her hand and kissed it quickly.

“No, no,” she faltered. “You must not think it. It isn't--you see,
I--there is nothing!”

“You shall not dull the edge of my hilarity,” he answered, “especially
since so much may be forgiven it.”

“Why did you leave Mr. Harkless?” she asked, without raising her eyes.

“My dear girl,” he replied, “because, for some inexplicable reason, my
lady cousin has not nominated me for Congress, but instead has chosen to
bestow that distinction upon another, and, I may say, an unworthier and
unfitter man than I. And, oddly enough, the non-discriminating multitude
were not cheering for me; the artillery was not in action to celebrate
me; the band was not playing to do me honor; therefore why should I ride
in the midst of a procession that knows me not? Why should I enthrone me
in an open barouche--a little faded and possibly not quite secure as to
its springs, but still a barouche--with four white horses to draw it,
and draped with silken flags, both barouche and steeds? Since these
things were not for me, I flew to your side to dissemble my spleen under
the licensed prattle of a cousin.”

“Then who _is_ with him?”

“The population of this portion of our State, I take it.”

“Oh, it's all right,” said the judge, leaning back to speak to Helen.
“Keating and Smith and your father are to ride in the carriage with him.
You needn't be afraid of any of them letting him know that H. Fisbee is
a lady. Everybody understands about that; of course they know it's to be
left to you to break it to him how well a girl has run his paper.” The
old gentleman chuckled, and looked out of the corner of his eye at his
daughter, whose expression was inscrutable.

“I!” cried Helen. “_I_ tell him! No one must tell him. He need never
know it.”

Briscoe reached back and patted her cheek. “How long do you suppose he
will be here in Plattville without it's leaking out?”

“But they kept guard over him for months and nobody told him.”

“Ah,” said Briscoe, “but this is different.”

“No, no, no!” she exclaimed. “It _must_ be kept from him somehow!”

“He'll know it by to-morrow, so you'd better tell him this evening.”

“This evening?”

“Yes. You'll have a good chance.”

“I will?”

“He's coming to supper with us. He and your father, of course, and
Keating and Bence and Boswell and Smith and Tom Martin and Lige. We're
going to have a big time, with you and Minnie to do the honors; and
we're all coming into town afterwards for the fireworks; I'll let him
drive you in the phaeton. You'll have plenty of time to talk it over
with him and tell him all about it.”

Helen gave a little gasp. “Never!” she cried. “Never!”

The buckboard stopped on the “Herald” corner, and here, and along Main
Street, the line of vehicles which had followed it from the station took
their places. The Square was almost a solid mass of bunting, and the
north entrance of the court-house had been decorated with streamers and
flags, so as to make it a sort of stand. Hither the crowd was already
streaming, and hither the procession made its way. At intervals the
cannon boomed, and Schofields' Henry was winnowing the air with his
bell; nobody had a better time that day than Schofields' Henry, except
old Wilkerson, who was with the procession.

In advance, came the boys, whooping and somersaulting, and behind them,
rode a band of mounted men, sitting their horses like cavalrymen, led by
the sheriff and his deputy and Jim Bardlock; then followed the Harkless
Club of Amo, led by Boswell, with the magnanimous Halloway himself
marching in the ranks; and at sight of this the people shouted like
madmen. But when Helen's eye fell upon his fat, rather unhappy face, she
felt a pang of pity and unreasoning remorse, which warned her that he
who looks upon politics when it is red must steel his eyes to see many a
man with the heart-burn. After the men of Amo, came the Harkless Club
of Gainesville, Mr. Bence in the van with the step of a grenadier. There
followed next, Mr. Ephraim Watts, bearing a light wand in his hand and
leading a detachment of workers from the oil-fields in their stained
blue overalls and blouses; and, after them, came Mr. Martin and Mr.
Landis at the head of an organization recognized in the “Order of
Procession,” printed in the “Herald,” as the Business Men of Plattville.
They played in such magnificent time that every high-stepping foot in
all the line came down with the same jubilant plunk, and lifted again
with a unanimity as complete as that of the last vote the convention had
taken that day. The leaders of the procession set a brisk pace, and who
could have set any other kind of a pace when on parade to the strains of
such a band, playing such a tune as “A New Coon in Town,” with all its
might and main?

But as the line swung into the Square, there came a moment when the tune
was ended, the musicians paused for breath, and there fell comparative
quiet. Amongst the ranks of Business Men ambled Mr. Wilkerson, singing
at the top of his voice, and now he could be heard distinctly enough
for those near to him to distinguish the melody with which it was his
intention to favor the public:

            “Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!
               As we go marching on.”

The words, the air, that husky voice, recalled to the men of Carlow
another day and another procession, not like this one. And the song
Wilkerson was singing is the one song every Northern-born American knows
and can sing. The leader of the band caught the sound, signalled to his
men; twenty instruments rose as one to twenty mouths; the snare-drum
rattled, the big drum crashed, the leader lifted his baton high over his
head, and music burst from twenty brazen throats:

             “Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!”

Instantaneously, the whole procession began to sing the refrain, and the
people in the street, and those in the wagons and carriages, and those
leaning from the windows joined with one accord, the ringing bells
caught the time of the song, and the upper air reverberated in the
rhythm.

The Harkless Club of Carlow wheeled into Main Street, two hundred
strong, with their banners and transparencies. Lige Willetts rode at
their head, and behind him strode young William Todd and Parker and Ross
Schofield and Homer Tibbs and Hartley Bowlder, and even Bud Tipworthy
held a place in the ranks through his connection with the “Herald.” They
were all singing.

And, behind them, Helen saw the flag-covered barouche and her father,
and beside him sat John Harkless with his head bared.

She glanced at Briscoe; he was standing on the front seat with Minnie
beside him, and both were singing. Meredith had climbed upon the back
seat and was nervously fumbling at a cigarette.

“Sing, Tom!” the girl cried to him excitedly.

“I should be ashamed not to,” he answered; and dropped the cigarette and
began to sing “John Brown's Body” with all his strength. With that she
seized his hand, sprang up beside him, and over the swelling chorus her
full soprano rose, lifted with all the power in her.

The barouche rolled into the Square, and, as it passed, Harkless turned,
and bent a sudden gaze upon the group in the buckboard; but the western
sun was in his eyes, and he only caught a glimpse of a vague, bright
shape and a dazzle of gold, and he was borne along and out of view, down
the singing street.

             “Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!
              Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!
              Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!
                   As we go marching on!”

The barouche stopped in front of the courthouse, and he passed up a lane
they made for him to the steps. When he turned to them to speak, they
began to cheer again, and he had to wait for them to quiet down.

“We can't hear him from over here,” said Briscoe, “we're too far off.
Mr. Meredith, suppose you take the ladies closer in, and I'll stay with
the horses. You want to hear his speech.”

“He is a great man, isn't he?” Meredith said to Helen, gravely, as he
handed her out of the buckboard. “I've been trying to realize for the
last few minutes, that he is the same old fellow I've been treating so
familiarly all day long.”

“Yes, he is a great man,” she answered. “This is only the beginning.”

“That's true,” said Briscoe, who had overheard her. “He'll go pretty
far. A man that people know is steady and strong and level-headed can
get whatever he wants, because a public man can get anything, if people
know he's safe and honest and they can rely on him for _sense_. It
sounds like a simple matter; but only three or four public men in the
country have convinced us that they are like that. Hurry along, young
people.”

Crossing the street, they met Miss Tibbs; she was wiping her streaming
eyes with the back of her left hand and still mechanically waving her
handkerchief with her right. “Isn't it beautiful?” she said, not ceasing
to flutter, unconsciously, the little square of cambric. “There was
such a throng that I grew faint and had to come away. I don't mind your
seeing me crying. Pretty near everybody cried when he walked up to the
steps and we saw that he was lame.”

Standing on the outskirts of the crowd, they could hear the mellow ring
of Harkless's voice, but only fragments of the speech, for it was rather
halting, and was not altogether clear in either rhetoric or delivery;
and Mr. Bence could have been a good deal longer in saying what he had
to say, and a thousand times more oratorical. Nevertheless, there was
not a man or woman present who did not declare that it was the greatest
speech ever heard in Plattville; and they really thought so--to such
lengths are loyalty and friendship sometimes carried in Carlow and Amo
and Gaines.

He looked down upon the attentive, earnest faces and into the kindly
eyes of the Hoosier country people, and, as he spoke, the thought kept
recurring to him that this was the place he had dreaded to come back to;
that these were the people he had wished to leave--these, who gave him
everything they had to give--and this made it difficult to keep his
tones steady and his throat clear.

Helen stood so far from the steps (nor could she be induced to penetrate
further, though they would have made way for her) that only fragments
reached her, but what she heard she remembered:

“I have come home... Ordinarily a man needs to fall sick by the wayside
or to be set upon by thieves, in order to realize that nine-tenths
of the world is Samaritan, and the other tenth only too busy or too
ignorant to be. Down here he realizes it with no necessity of illness
or wounds to bring it out; and if he does get hurt, you send him to
Congress.... There will be no other in Washington so proud of what
he stands for as I shall be. To represent you is to stand for
realities--fearlessness, honor, kindness.... We are people who take
what comes to us, and it comes bountifully; we are rich--oh, we are all
Americans here!... This is the place for a man who likes to live where
people are kind to one another, and where they have the old-fashioned
way of saying 'Home.' Other places, they don't seem to get so much into
it as we do. And to come home as I have to-day.... I have come home....”

Every one meant to shake hands with him, and, when the speech was over,
those nearest swooped upon him, cheering and waving, and grasping at
his hand. Then a line was formed, and they began to defile by him, as
he stood on the steps, and one by one they came up, and gave him hearty
greetings, and passed on through the court-house and out at the south
door. Tom Meredith and Minnie Briscoe came amongst the others, and Tom
said only, “Good old boy,” as he squeezed his friend's hand; and then,
as he went down the hall, wiping his glasses, he asked Minnie if she
believed the young man on the steps had risen from a sick bed that
morning.

It was five-o'clock when Harkless climbed the stairs to the “Herald”
 office, and his right arm and hand were aching and limp. Below him, as
he reached the landing, he could see boys selling extras containing his
speech (taken by the new reporter), and long accounts of the convention,
of the nominee's career, and the celebration of his home-coming. The
sales were rapid; for no one could resist the opportunity to read in
print descriptions of what his eyes had beheld and his ears had heard
that day.

Ross Schofield was the only person in the editorial room, and there was
nothing in his appearance which should cause a man to start and fall
back from the doorway; but that was what Harkless did.

“What's the matter, Mr. Harkless?” cried Ross, hurrying forward, fearing
that the other had been suddenly reseized by illness.

“What are those?” asked Harkless, with a gesture of his hand which
seemed to include the entire room.

“Those!” repeated Ross, staring blankly.

“Those rosettes--these streamers--that stovepipe--all this blue ribbon.”

Ross turned pale. “Ribbon?” he said, inquiringly. “Ribbon?” He seemed
unable to perceive the decorations referred to.

“Yes,” answered John; “these rosettes on the chairs, that band, and----”

“Oh!” Ross exclaimed. “That?” He fingered the band on the stovepipe as
if he saw it for the first time. “Yes; I see.”

“But what are they for?” asked Harkless, touching one of the streamers
curiously.

“Why--it's--it's likely meant for decorations.”

John picked up the ink-well, staring in complete amazement at the hard
knot of ribbon with which it was garnished.

“They seem to have been here some time.”

“They have; I reckon they're almost due to be called in. They've be'n up
ever sence--sence----”

“Who put them up, Ross?”

“We did.”

“What for?”

Ross was visibly embarrassed. “Why--fer--fer the other editor.”

“For Mr. Fisbee?”

“Land, no! You don't suppose we'd go to work and bother to brisken
things up fer that old gentleman, do you?”

“I meant young Mr. Fisbee--he is the other editor, isn't he?”

“Oh!” said Ross, coughing. “Young Mr. Fisbee? Yes; we put 'em up fer
him.”

“You did! Did he appreciate them?”

“Well--he seemed to--kind of like 'em.”

“Where is he now? I came here to find him.”

“He's gone.”

“Gone? Hasn't he been here this afternoon?”

“Yes; some 'the time. Come in and stayed durin' the leevy you was
holdin', and saw the extra off all right.”

“When will he be back?”

“Sence it's be'n a daily he gits here by eight, after supper, but don't
stay very late; the new man and old Mr. Fisbee and Parker look after
whatever comes in late, unless it's something special. He'll likely be
here by half-past eight at the farthest off.”

“I can't wait till then.” John took a quick turn about the room.
“I've been wanting to see him every minute since I got in,” he said
impatiently, “and he hasn't been near me. Nobody could even point him
out to me. Where has he gone? I want to see him _now_.”

“Want to discharge him again?” said a voice from the door, and turning,
they saw that Mr. Martin stood there observing them.

“No,” said Harkless; “I want to give him the 'Herald.' Do you know where
he is?”

Mr. Martin stroked his beard deliberately. “The person you speak
of hadn't ort to be very hard to find--in Carlow. The committee was
reckless enough to hire that carriage of yours by the day, and Keating
and Warren Smith are setting in it up at the corner, with their feet
on the cushions to show they're used to ridin' around with four white
horses every day in the week. It's waitin' till you're ready to go out
to Briscoe's. It's an hour before supper time, and you can talk to young
Fisbee all you want. He's out there.”

As they drove along the pike, Harkless's three companions kept up a
conversation sprightly beyond the mere exhilaration of the victorious;
but John sat almost silent, and, in spite of their liveliness, the
others eyed him a little anxiously now and then, knowing that he had
been living on excitement through a physically exhausting day, and they
were fearful lest his nerves react and bring him to a breakdown. But the
healthy flush of his cheek was reassuring; he looked steady and strong,
and they were pleased to believe that the stirring-up was what he
needed.

It had been a strange and beautiful day to him, begun in anger, but the
sun was not to go down upon his wrath; for his choleric intention had
almost vanished on his homeward way, and the first words Smith had
spoken had lifted the veil of young Fisbee's duplicity, had shown him
with what fine intelligence and supreme delicacy and sympathy young
Fisbee had worked for him, had understood him, and had _made_ him. If
the open assault on McCune had been pressed, and the damnatory evidence
published in Harkless's own paper, while Harkless himself was a
candidate and rival, John would have felt dishonored. The McCune papers
could have been used for Halloway's benefit, but not for his own; he
would not ride to success on another man's ruin; and young Fisbee had
understood and had saved him. It was a point of honor that many would
have held finicky and inconsistent, but one which young Fisbee had
comprehended was vital to Harkless.

And this was the man he had discharged like a dishonest servant; the man
who had thrown what was (in Carlow's eyes) riches into his lap; the man
who had made his paper, and who had made him, and saved him. Harkless
wanted to see young Fisbee as he longed to see only one other person
in the world. Two singular things had happened that day which made his
craving to see Helen almost unbearable--just to rest his eyes upon her
for a little while, he could ask no more. And as they passed along that
well-remembered road, every tree, every leaf by the wayside, it seemed,
spoke to him and called upon the dear memory of his two walks with
her--into town and out of town, on show-day. He wondered if his heart
was to project a wraith of her before him whenever he was deeply moved,
for the rest of his life. For twice to-day he had seen her whom he knew
to be so far away. She had gone back to her friends in the north, Tom
had said. Twice that afternoon he had been momentarily, but vividly,
conscious of her as a living presence. As he descended from the car
at the station, his eyes, wandering out over the tumultuous crowd, had
caught and held a picture for a second--a graceful arm upraised, and a
gloved hand pressed against a blushing cheek under a hat such as is not
worn in Carlow; a little figure poised apparently in air, full-length
above the crowd about her; so, for the merest flick of time he had seen
her, and then, to his straining eyes, it was as though she were not. She
had vanished. And again, as his carriage reached the Square, a feeling
had come to him that she was near him; that she was looking at him; that
he should see her when the carriage turned; and in the same instant,
above the singing of a multitude, he heard her voice as if there had
been no other and once more his dazzled eyes beheld her for a second;
she was singing, and as she sang she leaned toward him from on high with
the most ineffable look of tenderness and pride and affection he had
ever seen on a woman's face; such a look, he thought, as she would wear
if she came to love some archangel (her love should be no less) with all
of her heart and soul and strength. And so he knew he had seen a vision.
But it was a cruel one to visit a man who loved her. He had summoned his
philosophy and his courage in his interview with himself on the way to
Carlow, and they had answered; but nothing could answer if his eyes were
to play him tricks and bring her visibly before him, and with such an
expression as he had seen upon her face. It was too real. It made his
eyes yearn for the sight of her with an ache that was physical. And
even at that moment, he saw, far ahead of them on the road, two figures
standing in front of the brick house. One was unmistakable at any
distance. It was that of old Fisbee; and the other was a girl's: a
light, small figure without a hat, and the low, western sun dwelt on a
head that shone with gold. Harkless put his hand over his eyes with a
pain that was like the taste of hemlock in nectar.

“Sun in your eyes?” asked Keating, lifting his hat, so as to shield the
other's face.

“Yes.”

When he looked again, both figures were gone. He made up his mind that
he would think of the only other person who could absorb his attention,
at least for a time; very soon he would stand face to face with the six
feet of brawn and intelligence and manhood that was young Fisbee.

“You are sure he is there?” he asked Tom Martin.

“Yes,” answered Martin, with no need to inquire whom the editor meant.
“I reckon,” he continued, solemnly, peering at the other from under his
rusty hat-brim, “I reckon when you see him, maybe you'll want to put a
kind of codicil to that deed to the 'Herald.'”

“How's that, Martin?”

“Why, I guess maybe you'll--well, wait till you see him.”

“I don't want to wait much longer, when I remember what I owe him
and how I have used him, and that I have been here nearly three hours
without seeing him.”

As they neared the brick house Harkless made out, through the trees, a
retreative flutter of skirts on the porch, and the thought crossed his
mind that Minnie had flown indoors to give some final directions toward
the preparation of the banquet; but when the barouche halted at the
gate, he was surprised to see her waving to him from the steps, while
Tom Meredith and Mr. Bence and Mr. Boswell formed a little court around
her. Lige Willetts rode up on horse back at the same moment, and the
judge was waiting in front of the gate. Harkless stepped out of the
barouche and took his hand.

“I was told young Fisbee was here.”

“Young Fisbee is here,” said the judge.

“Where, please, Briscoe?”

“Want to see him right off?”

“I do, very much.”

“You'll withdraw his discharge, I expect, now?”

“Ah!” exclaimed the other. “I want to make him a present of the
'Herald,' if he'll take it.” He fumed to Meredith, who had come to the
gate. “Tom, where is he?”

Meredith put his hand on his friend's shoulder, and answered: “I don't
know. God bless you, old fellow!”

“The truth is,” said the judge, as they entered the gate, “that when you
drove up, young Fisbee ran into the house. Minnie--” He turned, but his
daughter had disappeared; however, she came to the door, a moment later,
and shook her head mysteriously at her father.

“Not in the house,” she said.

Mr. Fisbee came around the corner of the porch and went toward Harkless.
“Fisbee,” cried the latter, “where is your nephew?”

The old man took his hand in both his own, and looked him between the
eyes, and thus stood, while there was a long pause, the others watching
them.

“You must not say that I told you,” he said at last. “Go into the
garden.”

But when Harkless's step crunched the garden path there was no one
there. Asters were blooming in beds between the green rose-bushes,
and their many-fingered hands were flung open in wide surprise that he
should expect to find young Fisbee there. It was just before sunset.
Birds were gossiping in the sycamores on the bank. At the foot of
the garden, near the creek, there were some tall hydrangea bushes,
flower-laden, and, beyond them, one broad shaft of the sun smote the
creek bends for a mile in that flat land, and crossed the garden like a
bright, taut-drawn veil. Harkless passed the bushes and stepped out into
this gold brilliance. Then he uttered a cry and stopped.

Helen was standing beside the hydrangeas, with both hands against her
cheeks and her eyes fixed on the ground. She had run away as far as she
could run; there were high fences extending down to the creek on each
side, and the water was beyond.

“_You_!” he said. “_You--you_!”

She did not lift her eyes, but began to move away from him with little
backward steps. When she reached the bench on the bank, she spoke with
a quick intake of breath and in a voice he scarcely heard. It was the
merest whisper, and her words came so slowly that sometimes minutes
separated them.

“Can you--will you keep me--on the 'Herald'?”

“Keep you----”

“Will you--let me--help?”

He came near her. “I don't understand. Is it you--you--who are here
again?”

“Have you--forgiven me? You know now why I wouldn't--resign? You forgive
my--that telegram?”

“What telegram?”

“That one that came to you--this morning.”

“_Your_ telegram?”

“Yes.”

“Did you send me one?”

“Yes.”

“It did not come to me.”

“Yes--it did.”

“But there--What was it about?”

“It was signed,” she said, “it was signed--” She paused and turned half
way, not lifting the downcast lashes; her hand, laid upon the arm of the
bench, was shaking; she put it behind her. Then her eyes were lifted a
little, and, though they did not meet his, he saw them, and a strange,
frightened glory leaped in his heart. Her voice fell still lower and two
heavy tears rolled down her cheeks. “It was signed,” she whispered, “it
was signed--'H. Fisbee.'”

He began to tremble from head to foot. There was a long silence. She had
turned quite away from him. When he spoke, his voice was as low as hers,
and he spoke as slowly as she had.

“You mean--then--it was--you?”

“Yes.”

“You!”

“Yes.”

“And you have been here all the time?”

“All--all except the week you were--hurt, and that--that one evening.”

The bright veil which wrapped them was drawn away, and they stood in the
silent, gathering dusk.

He tried to loosen his neck-band; it seemed to be choking him. “I--I
can't--I don't comprehend it. I am trying to realize what it----”

“It means nothing,” she answered.

“There was an editorial, yesterday,” he said, “an editorial that I
thought was about Rodney McCune. Did you write it?”

“Yes.”

“It was about--me--wasn't it?”

“Yes.”

“It said--it said--that I had won the love of every person in Carlow
County.”

Suddenly she found her voice. “Do not misunderstand me,” she said
rapidly. “I have done the little that I have done out of gratitude.” She
faced him now, but without meeting his eyes. “I told you, remember,
that you would understand some day what I meant by that, and the day has
come. I owed you more gratitude than a woman ever owed a man before, I
think, and I would have died to pay a part of it. I set every gossip's
tongue in Rouen clacking at the very start, in the merest amateurish
preparation for the work Mr. Macauley gave me. That was nothing. And the
rest has been the happiest time in my life. I have only pleased myself,
after all!”

“What gratitude did you owe me?”

“What gratitude? For what you did for my father.”

“I have only seen your father once in my life--at your table at the
dance supper, that night.”

“Listen. My father is a gentle old man with white hair and kind eyes.
You saw my uncle, that night; he has been as good to me as a father,
since I was seven years old, and he gave me his name by law and I lived
with him. My father came to see me once a year; I never came to see him.
He always told me everything was well with him; that his life was happy.
Once he lost the little he had left to him in the world, his only way of
making his living. He had no friends; he was hungry and desperate, and
he wandered. I was dancing and going about wearing jewels--only--I did
not know. All the time the brave heart wrote me happy letters. I should
have known, for there was one who did, and who saved him. When at last
I came to see my father, he told me. He had written of his idol before;
but it was not till I came that he told it all to me. Do you know what
I felt? While his daughter was dancing cotillions, a stranger had taken
his hand--and--” A sob rose in her throat and checked her utterance
for a moment; but she threw up her head and met his eyes proudly.
“Gratitude, Mr. Harkless!” she cried. “I am James Fisbee's daughter.”

He fell back from the bench with a sharp exclamation, and stared at her
through the gray twilight. She went on hurriedly, again not looking at
him:

“When you showed me that you cared for me--when you told me that you
did--I--do you think I wanted to care for you? I wanted to do something
to show you that I could be ashamed of my vile neglect of him--something
to show you his daughter could be grateful. If I had loved you, what
I did would have been for that--and I could not have done it. And how
could I have shown my gratitude if I had done it for love? And it has
been such dear, happy work, the little I have done, that it seems, after
all, that I have done it for love of myself. But--but when you first
told me--” She broke off with a strange, fluttering, half inarticulate
little laugh that was half tears; and then resumed in another tone:
“When you told me you cared that night--that night we were here--how
could I be sure? It had been only two days, you see, and even if I could
have been sure of myself, why, I couldn't have told you. Oh! I had so
brazenly thrown myself at your head, time and again, those two days,
in my--my worship of your goodness to my father and my excitement in
recognizing in his friend the hero of my girlhood, that you had every
right to think I cared; but if--but if I had--if I had--loved you with
my whole soul, I could not have--why, no woman could have--I mean the
sort of girl I am couldn't have admitted it--must have denied it. And
what I was trying to do for you when we met in Rouen was--was courting
you. You surely see I couldn't have done it if I had cared. It
would have been brazen! And do you think that then I could have
answered--'Yes'--even if I wanted to--even if I had been sure of myself?
And now--” Her voice sank again to a whisper. “And now----”

From the meadows across the creek, and over the fields, came a far
tinkling of farm-bells. Three months ago, at this hour, John Harkless
had listened to that sound, and its great lonesomeness had touched his
heart like a cold hand; but now, as the mists were rising from the water
and the small stars pierced the sky one by one, glinting down through
the dim, immeasurable blue distances, he found no loneliness in heaven
or earth. He leaned forward toward her; the bench was between them. The
last light was gone; evening had fallen.

“And now--” he said.

She moved backward as he leaned nearer.

“You promised to remember on the day you understood,” she answered, a
little huskily, “that it was all from the purest gratitude.”

“And--and there is nothing else?”

“If there were,” she said, and her voice grew more and more unsteady,
“if there were, can't you see that what I have done--” She stopped, and
then, suddenly, “Ah, it would have been _brazen_!”

He looked up at the little stars and he heard the bells, and they struck
into his heart like a dirge. He made a singular gesture of abnegation,
and then dropped upon the bench with his head bowed between his hands.

She pressed her hand to her bosom, watching him in a startled fashion,
her eyes wide and her lips parted. She took a few quick, short steps
toward the garden, still watching him over her shoulder.

“You mustn't worry,” he said, not lifting his bent head, “I know you're
sorry. I'll be all right in a minute.”

She gave a hurried glance from right to left and from left to right,
like one in terror seeking a way of escape; she gathered her skirts in
her hand, as if to run into the garden; but suddenly she turned and ran
to him--ran to him swiftly, with her great love shining from her eyes.
She sank upon her knees beside him. She threw her arms about his neck
and kissed him on the forehead.

“Oh, my dear, don't you see?” she whispered, “don't you see--don't you
see?”

When they heard the judge calling from the orchard, they went back
through the garden toward the house. It was dark; the whitest asters
were but gray splotches. There was no one in the orchard; Briscoe had
gone indoors. “Did you know you are to drive me into town in the phaeton
for the fireworks?” she asked.

“Fireworks?”

“Yes; the Great Harkless has come home.”

Even in the darkness he could see the look the vision had given him when
the barouche turned into the Square. She smiled upon him and said, “All
afternoon I was wishing I could have been your mother.”

He clasped her hand more tightly. “This wonderful world!” he cried.
“Yesterday I had a doctor--a doctor to cure me of love-sickness!”

They went on a little way. “We must hurry,” she said. “I am sure they
have been waiting for us.” This was true; they had.

From the dining-room came laughter and hearty voices, and the windows
were bright with the light of many lamps. By and by, they stood just
outside the patch of light that fell from one of the windows.

“Look,” said Helen. “Aren't they good, dear people?”

“The beautiful people!” he answered.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Gentleman From Indiana, by Booth Tarkington

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GENTLEMAN FROM INDIANA ***

***** This file should be named 9659-0.txt or 9659-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/6/5/9659/

Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
